. 
. 
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) constitutes a heterogeneous breast cancer subgroup with poor prognosis; survival rates are likely to be lower with TNBC compared to other breast cancer subgroups. For this disease, systemic adjuvant chemotherapy regimens often yield suboptimal clinical results. To improve treatment regimens in TNBC, identification of molecular biomarkers may help to select patients for individualized adjuvant therapy. Evidence has accumulated that determination of the methylation status of the PITX2 gene provides a predictive value in various breast cancer subgroups, either treated with endocrine-based therapy or anthracycline-containing chemotherapy. To further explore the validity of this novel predictive candidate biomarker, in the present exploratory retrospective study, determination of the PITX2 DNA-methylation status was assessed for non-metastatic TNBC patients treated with adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy by molecular analysis of breast cancer tissues. The PITX2 DNA-methylation status was determined in fresh-frozen tumor tissue specimens (n=56) by methylation-specific qRT-PCR (qMSP) and the data related to disease-free and overall survival, applying an optimized DNA-methylation score of 6.35%. For non-metastatic TNBC patients treated with adjuvant systemic anthracycline-based chemotherapy, a low PITX2 DNA-methylation status (<6.35) defines TNBC patients with poor disease-free and overall survival. Univariate and multivariate analyses demonstrate the statistically independent predictive value of PITX2 DNA-methylation. For non-metastatic TNBC patients, selective determination of the PITX2 DNA-methylation status may serve as a cancer biomarker for predicting response to anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy. The assay based on methylation of the PIXT2 gene can be applied to frozen and routinely available formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast cancer tumor tissues that will not only define those TNBC patients who may benefit from anthracycline-based chemotherapy but also those who should be spared the necessity of such potentially toxic treatment. Such patients should be allocated to alternative treatment options.. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) constitutes a heterogeneous breast cancer subgroup with poor prognosis; survival rates are likely to be lower with TNBC compared to other breast cancer subgroups. For this disease, systemic adjuvant chemotherapy regimens often yield suboptimal clinical results. To improve treatment regimens in TNBC, identification of molecular biomarkers may help to select patients for individualized adjuvant therapy. Evidence has accumulated that determination of the methylation status of the PITX2 gene provides a predictive value in various breast cancer subgroups, either treated with endocrine-based therapy or anthracycline-containing chemotherapy. To further explore the validity of this novel predictive candidate biomarker, in the present exploratory retrospective study, determination of the PITX2 DNA-methylation status was assessed for non-metastatic TNBC patients treated with adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy by molecular analysis of breast cancer tissues. The PITX2 DNA-methylation status was determined in fresh-frozen tumor tissue specimens (n=56) by methylation-specific qRT-PCR (qMSP) and the data related to disease-free and overall survival, applying an optimized DNA-methylation score of 6.35%. For non-metastatic TNBC patients treated with adjuvant systemic anthracycline-based chemotherapy, a low PITX2 DNA-methylation status (<6.35) defines TNBC patients with poor disease-free and overall survival. Univariate and multivariate analyses demonstrate the statistically independent predictive value of PITX2 DNA-methylation. For non-metastatic TNBC patients, selective determination of the PITX2 DNA-methylation status may serve as a cancer biomarker for predicting response to anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy. The assay based on methylation of the PIXT2 gene can be applied to frozen and routinely available formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast cancer tumor tissues that will not only define those TNBC patients who may benefit from anthracycline-based chemotherapy but also those who should be spared the necessity of such potentially toxic treatment. Such patients should be allocated to alternative treatment options.

Epigenetic inactivation due to aberrant promoter methylation is a key process in breast tumorigenesis. Murine models for human breast cancer have been established for nearly every important human oncogene or tumor suppressor gene. Mouse-to-human comparative gene expression and cytogenetic profiling have been widely investigated for these models; however, little is known about the conservation of epigenetic alterations during tumorigenesis. To determine if this key process in human breast tumorigenesis is also mirrored in a murine breast cancer model, we mapped cytosine methylation changes in primary adenocarcinomas and paired lung metastases derived from the polyomavirus middle T antigen mouse model. Global changes in methylcytosine levels were observed in all tumors when compared to the normal mammary gland. Aberrant methylation and associated gene silencing was observed for Hoxa7, a gene that is differentially methylated in human breast tumors, and Gata2, a novel candidate gene. Analysis of HOXA7 and GATA2 expression in a bank of human primary tumors confirms that the expression of these genes is also reduced in human breast cancer. In addition, HOXA7 hypermethylation is observed in breast cancer tissues when compared to adjacent tumor-free tissue. Based on these studies, we present a model in which comparative epigenetic techniques can be used to identify novel candidate genes important for human breast tumorigenesis, in both primary and metastatic tumors.. Epigenetic inactivation due to aberrant promoter methylation is a key process in breast tumorigenesis. Murine models for human breast cancer have been established for nearly every important human oncogene or tumor suppressor gene. Mouse-to-human comparative gene expression and cytogenetic profiling have been widely investigated for these models; however, little is known about the conservation of epigenetic alterations during tumorigenesis. To determine if this key process in human breast tumorigenesis is also mirrored in a murine breast cancer model, we mapped cytosine methylation changes in primary adenocarcinomas and paired lung metastases derived from the polyomavirus middle T antigen mouse model. Global changes in methylcytosine levels were observed in all tumors when compared to the normal mammary gland. Aberrant methylation and associated gene silencing was observed for Hoxa7, a gene that is differentially methylated in human breast tumors, and Gata2, a novel candidate gene. Analysis of HOXA7 and GATA2 expression in a bank of human primary tumors confirms that the expression of these genes is also reduced in human breast cancer. In addition, HOXA7 hypermethylation is observed in breast cancer tissues when compared to adjacent tumor-free tissue. Based on these studies, we present a model in which comparative epigenetic techniques can be used to identify novel candidate genes important for human breast tumorigenesis, in both primary and metastatic tumors.

Previously we analysed overlapping homozygous deletions in lung and breast tumours/tumour lines and defined a small region of 120 kb (part of LCTSGR1) at 3p21.3 that contained putative lung and breast cancer tumour suppressor gene(s) (TSG). Eight genes including RASSF1 were isolated from the minimal region. However, extensive mutation analysis in lung tumours and tumour lines revealed only rare inactivating mutations. Recently, de novo methylation at a CpG island associated with isoform A of RASSF1 (RASSF1A) was reported in lung tumours and tumour lines. To investigate RASSF1A as a candidate TSG for various cancers, we investigated: (a) RASSF1A methylation status in a large series of primary tumour and tumour lines; (b) chromosome 3p allele loss in lung tumours and (c) RASSF1 mutation analysis in breast tumours. RASSF1A promoter region CpG island methylation was detected in 72% of SCLC, 34% of NSCLC, 9% of breast, 10% of ovarian and 0% of primary cervical tumours and in 72% SCLC, 36% NSCLC, 80% of breast and 40% of ovarian tumour lines. In view of the lower frequency of RASSF1 methylation in primary breast cancers we proceeded to RASSF1 mutation analysis in 40 breast cancers. No mutations were detected, but six single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified. Twenty of 26 SCLC tumours with 3p21.3 allelic loss had RASSF1A methylation, while only six out of 22 NSCLC with 3p21.3 allele loss had RASSF1A methylation (P=0.0012), one out of five ovarian and none out of six cervical tumours with 3p21.3 loss had RASSF1A methylation. These results suggest that (a) RASSF1A inactivation by two hits (methylation and loss) is a critical step in SCLC tumourigenesis and (b) RASSF1A inactivation is of lesser importance in NSCLC, breast, ovarian and cervical cancers in which other genes within LCTSGR1 are likely to be implicated.. Previously we analysed overlapping homozygous deletions in lung and breast tumours/tumour lines and defined a small region of 120 kb (part of LCTSGR1) at 3p21.3 that contained putative lung and breast cancer tumour suppressor gene(s) (TSG). Eight genes including RASSF1 were isolated from the minimal region. However, extensive mutation analysis in lung tumours and tumour lines revealed only rare inactivating mutations. Recently, de novo methylation at a CpG island associated with isoform A of RASSF1 (RASSF1A) was reported in lung tumours and tumour lines. To investigate RASSF1A as a candidate TSG for various cancers, we investigated: (a) RASSF1A methylation status in a large series of primary tumour and tumour lines; (b) chromosome 3p allele loss in lung tumours and (c) RASSF1 mutation analysis in breast tumours. RASSF1A promoter region CpG island methylation was detected in 72% of SCLC, 34% of NSCLC, 9% of breast, 10% of ovarian and 0% of primary cervical tumours and in 72% SCLC, 36% NSCLC, 80% of breast and 40% of ovarian tumour lines. In view of the lower frequency of RASSF1 methylation in primary breast cancers we proceeded to RASSF1 mutation analysis in 40 breast cancers. No mutations were detected, but six single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified. Twenty of 26 SCLC tumours with 3p21.3 allelic loss had RASSF1A methylation, while only six out of 22 NSCLC with 3p21.3 allele loss had RASSF1A methylation (P=0.0012), one out of five ovarian and none out of six cervical tumours with 3p21.3 loss had RASSF1A methylation. These results suggest that (a) RASSF1A inactivation by two hits (methylation and loss) is a critical step in SCLC tumourigenesis and (b) RASSF1A inactivation is of lesser importance in NSCLC, breast, ovarian and cervical cancers in which other genes within LCTSGR1 are likely to be implicated.

DNA methylation is one of several epigenetic changes observed in cells. Aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes, proto-oncogenes, and vital cell cycle genes has led many scientists to investigate the underlying cellular mechanisms of DNA methylation under normal and pathological conditions. Although DNA methylation is necessary for normal mammalian embryogenesis, both hypo- and hypermethylation of DNA are frequently observed in carcinogenesis and other pathological disorders. DNA hypermethylation silences the transcription of many tumor suppressor genes, resulting in immortalization of tumor cells. The reverse process, demethylation and restoration of normal functional expression of genes, is augmented by DNA methylation inhibitors. Recent studies suggest that DNA hypomethylation may also control gene expression and chromosomal stability. However, the roles of and relationship between hypomethylation and hypermethylation are not well understood. This review provides a brief overview of the mechanism of DNA methylation, its relationship to extrinsic stimulation including dietary intake and aging, and of abnormally methylated DNA in breast and colorectal cancers, which could be used as prognostic and diagnostic markers.. DNA methylation is one of several epigenetic changes observed in cells. Aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes, proto-oncogenes, and vital cell cycle genes has led many scientists to investigate the underlying cellular mechanisms of DNA methylation under normal and pathological conditions. Although DNA methylation is necessary for normal mammalian embryogenesis, both hypo- and hypermethylation of DNA are frequently observed in carcinogenesis and other pathological disorders. DNA hypermethylation silences the transcription of many tumor suppressor genes, resulting in immortalization of tumor cells. The reverse process, demethylation and restoration of normal functional expression of genes, is augmented by DNA methylation inhibitors. Recent studies suggest that DNA hypomethylation may also control gene expression and chromosomal stability. However, the roles of and relationship between hypomethylation and hypermethylation are not well understood. This review provides a brief overview of the mechanism of DNA methylation, its relationship to extrinsic stimulation including dietary intake and aging, and of abnormally methylated DNA in breast and colorectal cancers, which could be used as prognostic and diagnostic markers.

PURPOSE: To elucidate the role of metabolic dysregulation and associated DNA methylation changes on breast cancer risk and aggressive subtypes among Nigerian women. We describe the design and methods of a collaborative molecular epidemiology study of breast cancer in Nigerian hospitals. METHODS: The Mechanisms for Novel and Established Risk Factors for Breast Cancer in Women of Nigerian Descent (MEND) study was designed as a matched case-control study of 350 patients, age 18 to 75 years, with newly diagnosed, treatment-naive breast cancer and 350 age-matched healthy controls from surrounding geographic areas. Patients with breast cancer seen for initial diagnosis at four large tertiary hospitals in southwest Nigeria and one affiliated private hospital were recruited. Healthy female controls were selected from a cohort of 4,000 healthy women recruited as part of the Human Heredity and Health (H3) in Africa Chronic Kidney Disease Case-Control Study in Nigeria. Tumor and adjacent normal tissue, and blood and saliva samples were collected for molecular and epigenetic assays. RESULTS: Although recruitment is ongoing, a total of 416 patients have been recruited to date, with tumor and blood samples obtained from at least 310 patients. Data on age-matched (+/- 6 months) controls have also been obtained and harmonized. Lipid assays for 350 pathologically verified cases and 350 age-matched controls is underway, and pathologic characterization of tumors (including immunohistochemistry for subtyping) is ongoing. Data on DNA methylation for tumors and adjacent normal tissue are expected by the end of the study period. CONCLUSION: The MEND study will provide a unique, high-quality source of data to evaluate the contribution of metabolic dysregulation such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and metabolic syndrome to the biology of breast cancer among Nigerian women and foster collaborative studies relevant for women of African descent globally.. PURPOSE: To elucidate the role of metabolic dysregulation and associated DNA methylation changes on breast cancer risk and aggressive subtypes among Nigerian women. We describe the design and methods of a collaborative molecular epidemiology study of breast cancer in Nigerian hospitals. METHODS: The Mechanisms for Novel and Established Risk Factors for Breast Cancer in Women of Nigerian Descent (MEND) study was designed as a matched case-control study of 350 patients, age 18 to 75 years, with newly diagnosed, treatment-naive breast cancer and 350 age-matched healthy controls from surrounding geographic areas. Patients with breast cancer seen for initial diagnosis at four large tertiary hospitals in southwest Nigeria and one affiliated private hospital were recruited. Healthy female controls were selected from a cohort of 4,000 healthy women recruited as part of the Human Heredity and Health (H3) in Africa Chronic Kidney Disease Case-Control Study in Nigeria. Tumor and adjacent normal tissue, and blood and saliva samples were collected for molecular and epigenetic assays. RESULTS: Although recruitment is ongoing, a total of 416 patients have been recruited to date, with tumor and blood samples obtained from at least 310 patients. Data on age-matched (+/- 6 months) controls have also been obtained and harmonized. Lipid assays for 350 pathologically verified cases and 350 age-matched controls is underway, and pathologic characterization of tumors (including immunohistochemistry for subtyping) is ongoing. Data on DNA methylation for tumors and adjacent normal tissue are expected by the end of the study period. CONCLUSION: The MEND study will provide a unique, high-quality source of data to evaluate the contribution of metabolic dysregulation such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and metabolic syndrome to the biology of breast cancer among Nigerian women and foster collaborative studies relevant for women of African descent globally.

Localized promoter hypermethylation and overall DNA hypomethylation have been associated with the presence of tumor in humans. Yet, despite the large amount of recently produced epigenetic data, there is still a lack of understanding on how several genes behave in tumor cells with respect to their epigenetic alterations such as DNA methylation. Here we performed a novel type of analysis that measures the correlation of DNA methylation levels between two genes across many samples. We linked this so-called co-methylation to the genomic distance of these genes, their functional similarity and their expression levels. Co-methylation analysis of more than 300 breast cancer samples from the TCGA portal yielded 187 pairs of genes showing Pearson correlation coefficients |r| >/= 0.75. These pairs were formed by 133 genes. Less than half of these pairs are located on the same chromosome. For these, we found that the level of co-methylation is weakly anti-correlated with genomic distance (r = -0.29). Linking co-methylation with the functional similarity of genes showed that genes with r >/= 0.8 tend to have similar molecular function and to be involved in the same biological process as described in the Gene Ontology project. Clustering of highly co-methylated genes identified four enriched KEGG pathways. Hence we have introduced co-methylation as a new indicator to discover functional associations between gene pairs in breast cancer and furthermore to discover new candidate genes that should be inspected more closely in the context of the studied disease.. Localized promoter hypermethylation and overall DNA hypomethylation have been associated with the presence of tumor in humans. Yet, despite the large amount of recently produced epigenetic data, there is still a lack of understanding on how several genes behave in tumor cells with respect to their epigenetic alterations such as DNA methylation. Here we performed a novel type of analysis that measures the correlation of DNA methylation levels between two genes across many samples. We linked this so-called co-methylation to the genomic distance of these genes, their functional similarity and their expression levels. Co-methylation analysis of more than 300 breast cancer samples from the TCGA portal yielded 187 pairs of genes showing Pearson correlation coefficients |r| >/= 0.75. These pairs were formed by 133 genes. Less than half of these pairs are located on the same chromosome. For these, we found that the level of co-methylation is weakly anti-correlated with genomic distance (r = -0.29). Linking co-methylation with the functional similarity of genes showed that genes with r >/= 0.8 tend to have similar molecular function and to be involved in the same biological process as described in the Gene Ontology project. Clustering of highly co-methylated genes identified four enriched KEGG pathways. Hence we have introduced co-methylation as a new indicator to discover functional associations between gene pairs in breast cancer and furthermore to discover new candidate genes that should be inspected more closely in the context of the studied disease.

DNA methylation is the best characterised epigenetic change so far. However, its role in breast cancer metastasis has not as yet been elucidated. The aim of this study was to investigate the differences between the methylation profiles characterising primary tumours and their corresponding positive or negative for metastasis lymph nodes (LN) and correlate these with tumour metastatic potential. Methylation signatures of Caveolin-1, CXCR4, RAR-beta, Cyclin D2 and Twist gene promoters were studied in 30 breast cancer primary lesions and their corresponding metastasis-free and tumour-infiltrated LN with Methylation-Specific PCR. CXCR4 and Caveolin-1 expression was further studied by immunohistochemistry. Tumours were typified by methylation of RAR-beta and hypermethylation of Cyclin-D2 and Twist gene promoters. Tumour patterns were highly conserved in tumour-infiltrated LN. CXCR4 and Caveolin-1 promoter methylation patterns differentiated between node-negative and metastatic tumours. Nodal metastasis was associated with tumour and lymph node profiles of extended methylation of Caveolin-1 and lack of CXCR4 hypermethylation. Immunodetection studies verified CXCR4 and Caveolin-1 hypermethylation as gene silencing mechanism. Absence of Caveolin-1 expression in stromal cells associated with tumour aggressiveness while strong Caveolin-1 expression in tumour cells correlated with decreased 7-year disease-free survival. Methylation-mediated activation of CXCR4 and inactivation of Caveolin-1 was linked with nodal metastasis while intratumoral Caveolin-1 expression heterogeneity correlated with disease progression. This evidence contributes to the better understanding and, thereby, therapeutic management of breast cancer metastasis process.. DNA methylation is the best characterised epigenetic change so far. However, its role in breast cancer metastasis has not as yet been elucidated. The aim of this study was to investigate the differences between the methylation profiles characterising primary tumours and their corresponding positive or negative for metastasis lymph nodes (LN) and correlate these with tumour metastatic potential. Methylation signatures of Caveolin-1, CXCR4, RAR-beta, Cyclin D2 and Twist gene promoters were studied in 30 breast cancer primary lesions and their corresponding metastasis-free and tumour-infiltrated LN with Methylation-Specific PCR. CXCR4 and Caveolin-1 expression was further studied by immunohistochemistry. Tumours were typified by methylation of RAR-beta and hypermethylation of Cyclin-D2 and Twist gene promoters. Tumour patterns were highly conserved in tumour-infiltrated LN. CXCR4 and Caveolin-1 promoter methylation patterns differentiated between node-negative and metastatic tumours. Nodal metastasis was associated with tumour and lymph node profiles of extended methylation of Caveolin-1 and lack of CXCR4 hypermethylation. Immunodetection studies verified CXCR4 and Caveolin-1 hypermethylation as gene silencing mechanism. Absence of Caveolin-1 expression in stromal cells associated with tumour aggressiveness while strong Caveolin-1 expression in tumour cells correlated with decreased 7-year disease-free survival. Methylation-mediated activation of CXCR4 and inactivation of Caveolin-1 was linked with nodal metastasis while intratumoral Caveolin-1 expression heterogeneity correlated with disease progression. This evidence contributes to the better understanding and, thereby, therapeutic management of breast cancer metastasis process.

PURPOSE: The promoter methylation status of cell cycle regulatory genes plays a crucial role in the regulation of the eukaryotic cell cycle. CpG cytosines are actively subjected to methylation during tumorigenesis, resulting in gain/loss of function. E2F5 gene has growth repressive activities; various studies suggest its involvement in tumorigenesis. This study aims to investigate the epigenetic regulation of E2F5 in breast cancer to better understand tumor biology. METHODS: The promoter methylation status of 50 breast tumor tissues and adjacent normal control tissues was analyzed. mRNA expression was determined using SYBR(R) green quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and methylation-specific PCR was performed for bisulfite-modified genomic DNA using E2F5-specific primers to assess promoter methylation. Data was statistically analyzed. RESULTS: Significant (p<0.001) upregulation was observed in E2F5 expression among tumor tissues, relative to the control group. These samples were hypo-methylated at the E2F5 promoter region in the tumor tissues, compared to the control. Change in the methylation status (Deltameth) was significantly lower (p=0.022) in the tumor samples, indicating possible involvement in tumorigenesis. Patients at the postmenopausal stage showed higher methylation (75%) than those at the premenopausal stage (23.1%). Interestingly, methylation levels gradually increased from the early to the advanced stages of the disease (p<0.001), which suggests a putative role of E2F5 methylation in disease progression that can significantly modulate tumor biology at more advanced stage and at postmenopausal age (Pearson's r=0.99 and 0.86, respectively). Among tissues with different histological status, methylation frequency was higher in invasive lobular carcinoma (80.0%), followed by invasive ductal carcinoma (46.7%) and ductal carcinoma in situ (20.0%). CONCLUSION: Methylation is an important epigenetic factor that might be involved in the upregulation of E2F5 gene in tumor tissues, which can be used as a prognostic marker for breast cancer.. PURPOSE: The promoter methylation status of cell cycle regulatory genes plays a crucial role in the regulation of the eukaryotic cell cycle. CpG cytosines are actively subjected to methylation during tumorigenesis, resulting in gain/loss of function. E2F5 gene has growth repressive activities; various studies suggest its involvement in tumorigenesis. This study aims to investigate the epigenetic regulation of E2F5 in breast cancer to better understand tumor biology. METHODS: The promoter methylation status of 50 breast tumor tissues and adjacent normal control tissues was analyzed. mRNA expression was determined using SYBR(R) green quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and methylation-specific PCR was performed for bisulfite-modified genomic DNA using E2F5-specific primers to assess promoter methylation. Data was statistically analyzed. RESULTS: Significant (p<0.001) upregulation was observed in E2F5 expression among tumor tissues, relative to the control group. These samples were hypo-methylated at the E2F5 promoter region in the tumor tissues, compared to the control. Change in the methylation status (Deltameth) was significantly lower (p=0.022) in the tumor samples, indicating possible involvement in tumorigenesis. Patients at the postmenopausal stage showed higher methylation (75%) than those at the premenopausal stage (23.1%). Interestingly, methylation levels gradually increased from the early to the advanced stages of the disease (p<0.001), which suggests a putative role of E2F5 methylation in disease progression that can significantly modulate tumor biology at more advanced stage and at postmenopausal age (Pearson's r=0.99 and 0.86, respectively). Among tissues with different histological status, methylation frequency was higher in invasive lobular carcinoma (80.0%), followed by invasive ductal carcinoma (46.7%) and ductal carcinoma in situ (20.0%). CONCLUSION: Methylation is an important epigenetic factor that might be involved in the upregulation of E2F5 gene in tumor tissues, which can be used as a prognostic marker for breast cancer.

. 
BACKGROUND: The Bcl-2 protein family members have known as essential controllersof mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. Bax has been implicated as potential tumor suppressor in certain solid tumors such as breast and colorectal carcinoma. DNA methylation of promoter associated CpG islands has known as a common mechanism for gene inactivation in tumor cells. METHODS: The Methylation Specific PCR (MSP) has used to find the methylation profile of the bax gene promoter CpG islands in colorectal and breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: We have not detected any kind of "CpG islands hypermethylation" in promoter region of the bax gene in T47D, MCF7 (as ER positive), MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 (as ER negative) breast carcinoma-derived cell lines and colorectal cancer cell lines H29 and Caco II. CONCLUSION: It seems that CpG island methylation could not play the main role in down-regulation of bax gene in breast and colon cancers.. BACKGROUND: The Bcl-2 protein family members have known as essential controllersof mitochondrial pathway of apoptosis. Bax has been implicated as potential tumor suppressor in certain solid tumors such as breast and colorectal carcinoma. DNA methylation of promoter associated CpG islands has known as a common mechanism for gene inactivation in tumor cells. METHODS: The Methylation Specific PCR (MSP) has used to find the methylation profile of the bax gene promoter CpG islands in colorectal and breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: We have not detected any kind of "CpG islands hypermethylation" in promoter region of the bax gene in T47D, MCF7 (as ER positive), MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 (as ER negative) breast carcinoma-derived cell lines and colorectal cancer cell lines H29 and Caco II. CONCLUSION: It seems that CpG island methylation could not play the main role in down-regulation of bax gene in breast and colon cancers.

AIMS: Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) is characterized by aggressive behaviour; its genesis is the perturbation of DNA repair as a consequence of BRCA1 methylation or mutation. We comparatively evaluated alterations of DNA repair proteins and p53 between BLBC and non-BLBC cases. METHODS AND RESULTS: Tumour sections from 104 BLBC and 89 non-BLBC patients were immunostained for hMLH1, hMSH2, MGMT, BRCA1 and p53. Methylation status of DNA repair genes was analysed by methylation-specific PCR, and p53 mutation was examined by direct sequencing. Immunoreactive levels of hMLH1 and MGMT were lower in BLBC, whereas the levels of hMSH2 and p53 were higher, compared to non-BLBC (P </= 0.014). Reduced expression of hMLH1 [hazard ratio (HR) 5.26, P = 0.001] and preserved expression of MGMT (HR 2.58, P = 0.039) proved to be independent predictors of poor survival in BLBC patients. DNA repair genes were methylated in approximately 20-40% of BLBCs without a significant relationship between their methylation and p53 mutation. BRCA1 methylation was associated with the loss of its protein expression (P = 0.004). MGMT methylation was linked to larger tumour size (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Perturbations of the DNA repair system might be different between BLBC and non-BLBC. Alterations of hMLH1 and MGMT appear important for tumour progression and survival in BLBC patients.. AIMS: Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) is characterized by aggressive behaviour; its genesis is the perturbation of DNA repair as a consequence of BRCA1 methylation or mutation. We comparatively evaluated alterations of DNA repair proteins and p53 between BLBC and non-BLBC cases. METHODS AND RESULTS: Tumour sections from 104 BLBC and 89 non-BLBC patients were immunostained for hMLH1, hMSH2, MGMT, BRCA1 and p53. Methylation status of DNA repair genes was analysed by methylation-specific PCR, and p53 mutation was examined by direct sequencing. Immunoreactive levels of hMLH1 and MGMT were lower in BLBC, whereas the levels of hMSH2 and p53 were higher, compared to non-BLBC (P </= 0.014). Reduced expression of hMLH1 [hazard ratio (HR) 5.26, P = 0.001] and preserved expression of MGMT (HR 2.58, P = 0.039) proved to be independent predictors of poor survival in BLBC patients. DNA repair genes were methylated in approximately 20-40% of BLBCs without a significant relationship between their methylation and p53 mutation. BRCA1 methylation was associated with the loss of its protein expression (P = 0.004). MGMT methylation was linked to larger tumour size (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Perturbations of the DNA repair system might be different between BLBC and non-BLBC. Alterations of hMLH1 and MGMT appear important for tumour progression and survival in BLBC patients.

Altered DNA methylation patterns are found in many diseases, particularly in cancer, where the analysis of DNA methylation holds the promise to provide diagnostic, prognostic and predictive information of great clinical value. Methylation of the promoter-associated CpG island of GSTP1 occurs in many hormone-sensitive cancers, has been shown to be a biomarker for the early detection of cancerous lesions and has been associated with important clinical parameters, such as survival and response to treatment. In the current manuscript, we assessed the performance of several widely-used sodium bisulfite conversion-dependent methods (methylation-specific PCR, MethyLight, pyrosequencing and MALDI mass-spectrometry) for the analysis of DNA methylation patterns in the GSTP1 promoter. We observed large discordances between the results obtained by the different technologies. Cloning and sequencing of the investigated region resolved single-molecule DNA methylation patterns and identified heterogeneous DNA methylation patterns as the underlying cause of the differences. Heterogeneous DNA methylation patterns in the GSTP1 promoter constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of DNA methylation-based analysis of GSTP1 and might explain some of the contradictory findings in the analysis of the significance of GSTP1 promoter methylation in breast cancer.. Altered DNA methylation patterns are found in many diseases, particularly in cancer, where the analysis of DNA methylation holds the promise to provide diagnostic, prognostic and predictive information of great clinical value. Methylation of the promoter-associated CpG island of GSTP1 occurs in many hormone-sensitive cancers, has been shown to be a biomarker for the early detection of cancerous lesions and has been associated with important clinical parameters, such as survival and response to treatment. In the current manuscript, we assessed the performance of several widely-used sodium bisulfite conversion-dependent methods (methylation-specific PCR, MethyLight, pyrosequencing and MALDI mass-spectrometry) for the analysis of DNA methylation patterns in the GSTP1 promoter. We observed large discordances between the results obtained by the different technologies. Cloning and sequencing of the investigated region resolved single-molecule DNA methylation patterns and identified heterogeneous DNA methylation patterns as the underlying cause of the differences. Heterogeneous DNA methylation patterns in the GSTP1 promoter constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of DNA methylation-based analysis of GSTP1 and might explain some of the contradictory findings in the analysis of the significance of GSTP1 promoter methylation in breast cancer.

Estrogen is the main stimulant in the development and growth of breast cancer. The estrogen receptor antagonist tamoxifen has been mainstay of hormonal therapy. Although tamoxifen has been an effective adjuvant therapy, approximately 30% of patients treated with this agent still die within 10 years of follow-up treatment, and relapses can occur for > or = 20 years following therapy. However, the underlying cause of treatment failure in many breast cancer patients receiving tamoxifen is resistance to tamoxifen. ERbeta may influence estrogen action through the ERalpha pathway and the hormone refractoriness of breast cancer. ERbetacx, the carboxy terminal splicing variant of ERbeta, has been considered a dominant repressor of ERalpha function, because ERbetacx inhibits transcriptional activity of ERalpha rather than ERbeta wild type (wt). Tamoxifen responders tended to exhibit a lower ratio of ERbetacx to ERbetawt than non-responders. Induction of ERbeta reduces growth of exponentially proliferating cells. Since the promoter region of ERbeta is rich in CpG dinucleotides, loss of expression of ERbeta observed in some tumours could be due to aberrant methylation of CpG islands. Treatment of ERbeta-negative cell lines with DNA methyl transferase inhibitors restored ERbeta expression, providing experimental evidence that silencing of ERbeta in breast carcinomas could be due to promoter hypermethylation. Procainamide, used for cardiac arrhythmias, has been proposed as being a non-nucleoside inhibitor of DNA methylation and also demthylates and reactivate tumor suppressor genes in breast cancer cell lines. Therefore, concomitant use of procainamide with tamoxifen in ERalpha-positive and ERbeta-negative breast cancers may increase the tamoxifen response. Procainamide, given orally may also be used in breast cancer patients who developed resistance during the tamoxifen treatment. In vivo and in vitro studies evaluating effectiveness of concomitant use of procainamide and tamoxifen in tamoxifen resistant and ERbeta-negative breast cancer may further support our hypothesis.. Estrogen is the main stimulant in the development and growth of breast cancer. The estrogen receptor antagonist tamoxifen has been mainstay of hormonal therapy. Although tamoxifen has been an effective adjuvant therapy, approximately 30% of patients treated with this agent still die within 10 years of follow-up treatment, and relapses can occur for > or = 20 years following therapy. However, the underlying cause of treatment failure in many breast cancer patients receiving tamoxifen is resistance to tamoxifen. ERbeta may influence estrogen action through the ERalpha pathway and the hormone refractoriness of breast cancer. ERbetacx, the carboxy terminal splicing variant of ERbeta, has been considered a dominant repressor of ERalpha function, because ERbetacx inhibits transcriptional activity of ERalpha rather than ERbeta wild type (wt). Tamoxifen responders tended to exhibit a lower ratio of ERbetacx to ERbetawt than non-responders. Induction of ERbeta reduces growth of exponentially proliferating cells. Since the promoter region of ERbeta is rich in CpG dinucleotides, loss of expression of ERbeta observed in some tumours could be due to aberrant methylation of CpG islands. Treatment of ERbeta-negative cell lines with DNA methyl transferase inhibitors restored ERbeta expression, providing experimental evidence that silencing of ERbeta in breast carcinomas could be due to promoter hypermethylation. Procainamide, used for cardiac arrhythmias, has been proposed as being a non-nucleoside inhibitor of DNA methylation and also demthylates and reactivate tumor suppressor genes in breast cancer cell lines. Therefore, concomitant use of procainamide with tamoxifen in ERalpha-positive and ERbeta-negative breast cancers may increase the tamoxifen response. Procainamide, given orally may also be used in breast cancer patients who developed resistance during the tamoxifen treatment. In vivo and in vitro studies evaluating effectiveness of concomitant use of procainamide and tamoxifen in tamoxifen resistant and ERbeta-negative breast cancer may further support our hypothesis.

American women of African ancestry (AA) are more likely than European-Americans (EA) to be diagnosed with aggressive, estrogen receptor (ER) negative breast tumors; mechanisms underlying these disparities are poorly understood. We conducted a genome wide (450K loci) methylation analysis to determine if there were differences in DNA methylation patterns between tumors from AA and EA women and if these differences were similar for both ER positive and ER negative breast cancer. Methylation levels at CpG loci within CpG islands (CGI)s and CGI-shores were significantly higher in tumors (n=138) than in reduction mammoplasty samples (n=124). In hierarchical cluster analysis, there was separation between tumor and normal samples, and in tumors, there was delineation by ER status, but not by ancestry. However, differential methylation analysis identified 157 CpG loci with a mean beta value difference of at least 0.17 between races, with almost twice as many differences in ER-negative tumors compared to ER-positive cancers. This first genome-wide methylation study to address disparities indicates that there are likely differing etiologic pathways for the development of ER negative breast cancer between AA and EA women. Further investigation of the genes most differentially methylated by race in ER negative tumors can guide new approaches for cancer prevention and targeted therapies, and elucidate the biologic basis of breast cancer disparities.. American women of African ancestry (AA) are more likely than European-Americans (EA) to be diagnosed with aggressive, estrogen receptor (ER) negative breast tumors; mechanisms underlying these disparities are poorly understood. We conducted a genome wide (450K loci) methylation analysis to determine if there were differences in DNA methylation patterns between tumors from AA and EA women and if these differences were similar for both ER positive and ER negative breast cancer. Methylation levels at CpG loci within CpG islands (CGI)s and CGI-shores were significantly higher in tumors (n=138) than in reduction mammoplasty samples (n=124). In hierarchical cluster analysis, there was separation between tumor and normal samples, and in tumors, there was delineation by ER status, but not by ancestry. However, differential methylation analysis identified 157 CpG loci with a mean beta value difference of at least 0.17 between races, with almost twice as many differences in ER-negative tumors compared to ER-positive cancers. This first genome-wide methylation study to address disparities indicates that there are likely differing etiologic pathways for the development of ER negative breast cancer between AA and EA women. Further investigation of the genes most differentially methylated by race in ER negative tumors can guide new approaches for cancer prevention and targeted therapies, and elucidate the biologic basis of breast cancer disparities.

DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification of DNA that adds a methyl group to cytosine. Aberrant DNA methylation in the CpG context is frequently observed in cancer cells and it is known that aberrant DNA methylation silences tumor repressor genes. However, the mechanism of DNA methylation is not well understood. A widely accepted hypothesis is that DNA methylation does not randomly occur and may be controlled by some instructive mechanisms. In this paper, we conducted an extensive study on this important question by using proprietary sequencing data from methyl-binding domain protein (MBD)-Cap ChIP sequencing experiments for 30 breast cancer cell lines. The goal of our study is to investigate difference in nucleotide composition around CpG sites, where high levels of methylation are observed, and use the information for modeling DNA methylation susceptibility. First, we observed that DNA methylation is not uniform in the whole-genome region and also that the character composition of CpG flanking sequences are significantly different between hyper- and hypo-methylated groups. In an in-depth study, we used information theoretic approaches such as entropy and relative entropy to delineate character composition features and found enrichment of A (Adenine) and T (Thymine) in specific positions around hyper-methylated sites. As the methylation level is increased, A, T proportions in specific positions around hypermethylated sites are increased while A, T proportions in other positions around hypermethylated sites are decreased. Second, we built predictive models for methylation susceptibility by using characters flanking CpG sites as features and hyper-/hypo-methylation status as class. Third, we constructed predictive models using a log odds score of two profiles from DNA sequences surrounding CpG sites of hyper- and hypo-methylated groups. This analysis showed that distribution of profile scores of hyper-/hypo-methylated sites sequences is quite distinct. Our genome-wide CpG methylation study shows that nucleotides around CpG sites caries information for cytosine methylation. This is consistent with the seminal work on the instructive evidence of DNA methylation by Keshet et al. (Nature Genetics, 38(2), 149-153 2006). Our study is on the full genome scale and used the sequencing data, thus our study is significantly different in terms of resolution of data and analysis methods used for the study by Keshet et al.. DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification of DNA that adds a methyl group to cytosine. Aberrant DNA methylation in the CpG context is frequently observed in cancer cells and it is known that aberrant DNA methylation silences tumor repressor genes. However, the mechanism of DNA methylation is not well understood. A widely accepted hypothesis is that DNA methylation does not randomly occur and may be controlled by some instructive mechanisms. In this paper, we conducted an extensive study on this important question by using proprietary sequencing data from methyl-binding domain protein (MBD)-Cap ChIP sequencing experiments for 30 breast cancer cell lines. The goal of our study is to investigate difference in nucleotide composition around CpG sites, where high levels of methylation are observed, and use the information for modeling DNA methylation susceptibility. First, we observed that DNA methylation is not uniform in the whole-genome region and also that the character composition of CpG flanking sequences are significantly different between hyper- and hypo-methylated groups. In an in-depth study, we used information theoretic approaches such as entropy and relative entropy to delineate character composition features and found enrichment of A (Adenine) and T (Thymine) in specific positions around hyper-methylated sites. As the methylation level is increased, A, T proportions in specific positions around hypermethylated sites are increased while A, T proportions in other positions around hypermethylated sites are decreased. Second, we built predictive models for methylation susceptibility by using characters flanking CpG sites as features and hyper-/hypo-methylation status as class. Third, we constructed predictive models using a log odds score of two profiles from DNA sequences surrounding CpG sites of hyper- and hypo-methylated groups. This analysis showed that distribution of profile scores of hyper-/hypo-methylated sites sequences is quite distinct. Our genome-wide CpG methylation study shows that nucleotides around CpG sites caries information for cytosine methylation. This is consistent with the seminal work on the instructive evidence of DNA methylation by Keshet et al. (Nature Genetics, 38(2), 149-153 2006). Our study is on the full genome scale and used the sequencing data, thus our study is significantly different in terms of resolution of data and analysis methods used for the study by Keshet et al.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Numerous studies have suggested that the promoter methylation status of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is significantly associated with breast cancer. However, these studies have not demonstrated consistent results. METHODS: To obtain more accurate results for this possible association, we performed a meta-analysis-based study using the relevant data. A total of 14 articles were included in this meta-analysis. RESULTS: Our study showed that the frequency of MGMT promoter methylation was significantly higher in patients with breast cancer than non-breast cancer subjects with an Odds Ratio (OR) of 4.47, a 95% Confidence Interval (CI) ranging between 1.95 - 10.25 and a P value of 0.0004. Moreover, MGMT methylation was significantly associated with the negative expression of the MGMT protein (OR = 4.65, 95%CI = 2.66 - 8.12, P < 0.00001), Oestrogen Receptor (ER)-negative tumours (OR = 1.79, 95%CI = 1.09 - 2.93, P = 0.02), postmenopausal status (OR =1.84, 95%CI = 1.18 - 2.87, P = 0.007) and histological grade III tumours (OR = 2.49, 95%CI = 1.53 - 4.07, P = 0.0003) in breast cancer patients. However, breast cancer was not significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis (OR = 1.19, 95%CI = 0.83 - 1.70, P = 0.35), Progesterone Receptor (PR) status (OR = 1.08, 95%CI = 0.58 - 2.00, P = 0.81), Human epidermal growth factor receptor - 2HER-2/neustatus (OR = 1.01, 95%CI = 0.65 - 1.57, P = 0.97), P53 mutation (OR = 1.30, 95%CI = 0.76 - 2.21, P = 0.34) and age > 50 (OR = 1.07, 95%CI = 0.46 - 2.51, P = 0.88). CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that MGMT promoter methylation may be an early biomarker for the diagnosis of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND/AIMS: Numerous studies have suggested that the promoter methylation status of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is significantly associated with breast cancer. However, these studies have not demonstrated consistent results. METHODS: To obtain more accurate results for this possible association, we performed a meta-analysis-based study using the relevant data. A total of 14 articles were included in this meta-analysis. RESULTS: Our study showed that the frequency of MGMT promoter methylation was significantly higher in patients with breast cancer than non-breast cancer subjects with an Odds Ratio (OR) of 4.47, a 95% Confidence Interval (CI) ranging between 1.95 - 10.25 and a P value of 0.0004. Moreover, MGMT methylation was significantly associated with the negative expression of the MGMT protein (OR = 4.65, 95%CI = 2.66 - 8.12, P < 0.00001), Oestrogen Receptor (ER)-negative tumours (OR = 1.79, 95%CI = 1.09 - 2.93, P = 0.02), postmenopausal status (OR =1.84, 95%CI = 1.18 - 2.87, P = 0.007) and histological grade III tumours (OR = 2.49, 95%CI = 1.53 - 4.07, P = 0.0003) in breast cancer patients. However, breast cancer was not significantly correlated with lymph node metastasis (OR = 1.19, 95%CI = 0.83 - 1.70, P = 0.35), Progesterone Receptor (PR) status (OR = 1.08, 95%CI = 0.58 - 2.00, P = 0.81), Human epidermal growth factor receptor - 2HER-2/neustatus (OR = 1.01, 95%CI = 0.65 - 1.57, P = 0.97), P53 mutation (OR = 1.30, 95%CI = 0.76 - 2.21, P = 0.34) and age > 50 (OR = 1.07, 95%CI = 0.46 - 2.51, P = 0.88). CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that MGMT promoter methylation may be an early biomarker for the diagnosis of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: BRCA1 mutation carriers have an 85% risk of developing breast cancer but the risk of developing non-hereditary breast cancer is difficult to assess. Our objective is to test whether a DNA methylation (DNAme) signature derived from BRCA1 mutation carriers is able to predict non-hereditary breast cancer. METHODS: In a case/control setting (72 BRCA1 mutation carriers and 72 BRCA1/2 wild type controls) blood cell DNA samples were profiled on the Illumina 27 k methylation array. Using the Elastic Net classification algorithm, a BRCA1-mutation DNAme signature was derived and tested in two cohorts: (1) The NSHD (19 breast cancers developed within 12 years after sample donation and 77 controls) and (2) the UKCTOCS trial (119 oestrogen receptor positive breast cancers developed within 5 years after sample donation and 122 controls). RESULTS: We found that our blood-based BRCA1-mutation DNAme signature applied to blood cell DNA from women in the NSHD resulted in a receiver operating characteristics (ROC) area under the curve (AUC) of 0.65 (95% CI 0.51 to 0.78, P = 0.02) which did not validate in buccal cells from the same individuals. Applying the signature in blood DNA from UKCTOCS volunteers resulted in AUC of 0.57 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.64; P = 0.03) and is independent of family history or any other known risk factors. Importantly the BRCA1-mutation DNAme signature was able to predict breast cancer mortality (AUC = 0.67; 95% CI 0.51 to 0.83; P = 0.02). We also found that the 1,074 CpGs which are hypermethylated in BRCA1 mutation carriers are significantly enriched for stem cell polycomb group target genes (P <10(-20)). CONCLUSIONS: A DNAme signature derived from BRCA1 carriers is able to predict breast cancer risk and death years in advance of diagnosis. Future studies may need to focus on DNAme profiles in epithelial cells in order to reach the AUC thresholds required of preventative measures or early detection strategies.. BACKGROUND: BRCA1 mutation carriers have an 85% risk of developing breast cancer but the risk of developing non-hereditary breast cancer is difficult to assess. Our objective is to test whether a DNA methylation (DNAme) signature derived from BRCA1 mutation carriers is able to predict non-hereditary breast cancer. METHODS: In a case/control setting (72 BRCA1 mutation carriers and 72 BRCA1/2 wild type controls) blood cell DNA samples were profiled on the Illumina 27 k methylation array. Using the Elastic Net classification algorithm, a BRCA1-mutation DNAme signature was derived and tested in two cohorts: (1) The NSHD (19 breast cancers developed within 12 years after sample donation and 77 controls) and (2) the UKCTOCS trial (119 oestrogen receptor positive breast cancers developed within 5 years after sample donation and 122 controls). RESULTS: We found that our blood-based BRCA1-mutation DNAme signature applied to blood cell DNA from women in the NSHD resulted in a receiver operating characteristics (ROC) area under the curve (AUC) of 0.65 (95% CI 0.51 to 0.78, P = 0.02) which did not validate in buccal cells from the same individuals. Applying the signature in blood DNA from UKCTOCS volunteers resulted in AUC of 0.57 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.64; P = 0.03) and is independent of family history or any other known risk factors. Importantly the BRCA1-mutation DNAme signature was able to predict breast cancer mortality (AUC = 0.67; 95% CI 0.51 to 0.83; P = 0.02). We also found that the 1,074 CpGs which are hypermethylated in BRCA1 mutation carriers are significantly enriched for stem cell polycomb group target genes (P <10(-20)). CONCLUSIONS: A DNAme signature derived from BRCA1 carriers is able to predict breast cancer risk and death years in advance of diagnosis. Future studies may need to focus on DNAme profiles in epithelial cells in order to reach the AUC thresholds required of preventative measures or early detection strategies.

PURPOSE: Genomic alterations (including gene hypermethylation) are likely to precede the phenotypic changes associated with breast tumorigenesis. From a prospective collection of ductal lavage (DL) samples from women with a known mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2, we have assessed promoter methylation with a comparison of results with several variables, including breast cancer (BC) outcome. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Hypermethylation of p16, RASSF1A, twist, and RARbeta was assessed using a qualitative, real-time, nested PCR assay. Associations between methylation status and variables were tested using Fisher's exact test or logistic regression. Analyses were done at three levels: a single breast, a single duct (both over time), and each DL sample in isolation. RESULTS: A total of 168 samples from 93 ducts in 54 breasts have been analyzed in 34 women (16 BRCA1 and 18 BRCA2 mutation carriers). A median of 2 DL was done (range, 1-5), with 7 women developing BC on study, 1 bilateral. Methylation of p16 was associated with a known BRCA1 mutation (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, and P < 0.001 for breast, duct, and sample levels, respectively) and women with a history of contralateral BC (P = 0.001 and P < 0.001 for duct and sample levels, respectively). An association was seen for women who developed BC on study and RASSF1A methylation (P = 0.001 for sample level). CONCLUSIONS: Genetic methylation patterns could potentially be used to predict future BC risk. In addition, p16 methylation may be a predictor of BRCA1 mutation status. Further research is required to corroborate these findings.. PURPOSE: Genomic alterations (including gene hypermethylation) are likely to precede the phenotypic changes associated with breast tumorigenesis. From a prospective collection of ductal lavage (DL) samples from women with a known mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2, we have assessed promoter methylation with a comparison of results with several variables, including breast cancer (BC) outcome. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Hypermethylation of p16, RASSF1A, twist, and RARbeta was assessed using a qualitative, real-time, nested PCR assay. Associations between methylation status and variables were tested using Fisher's exact test or logistic regression. Analyses were done at three levels: a single breast, a single duct (both over time), and each DL sample in isolation. RESULTS: A total of 168 samples from 93 ducts in 54 breasts have been analyzed in 34 women (16 BRCA1 and 18 BRCA2 mutation carriers). A median of 2 DL was done (range, 1-5), with 7 women developing BC on study, 1 bilateral. Methylation of p16 was associated with a known BRCA1 mutation (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, and P < 0.001 for breast, duct, and sample levels, respectively) and women with a history of contralateral BC (P = 0.001 and P < 0.001 for duct and sample levels, respectively). An association was seen for women who developed BC on study and RASSF1A methylation (P = 0.001 for sample level). CONCLUSIONS: Genetic methylation patterns could potentially be used to predict future BC risk. In addition, p16 methylation may be a predictor of BRCA1 mutation status. Further research is required to corroborate these findings.

We investigated the mechanism of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) beta2 gene silencing in breast cancer cells. Transfection experiments indicated that MCF-7 cells transactivate an exogenous beta2 promoter (-1470/+156) to the same extent as MTSV1.7 breast epithelial cells, which express endogenous RARbeta2. This was true even in the context of replicated chromatin, suggesting a cis-acting rather than a trans-acting defect. Cytosine methylation, a cis-acting DNA modification, has been implicated in RARbeta2 silencing in cancer cells. Upon bisulfite genomic sequencing, we found that 3 CpG sites in the beta2 RARE region were variably methylated in MCF-7 cells but were not methylated in MTSV1.7 cells or in 2 MDA-MB-231 subclones that differed in RARbeta2 expression (high in clone A2, low in clone A4). However, the 5'-UTR region was hypermethylated in clone A4 relative to clone A2 cells. Following 5-azacytidine treatment, RA and trichostatin A markedly induced RARbeta2 expression in MCF-7 cells but not in MDA-MB-231 clone A4 cells. A beta2 RARE reporter construct in which the methylation-susceptible cytosines in the sense strand were replaced by thymine displayed marked loss of activity in a replicated chromatin-dependent manner. We conclude that cytosine methylation contributes to RARbeta2 gene silencing in MCF-7 cells and that methylation of the RARE region may be particularly important. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4066 - 4070.. We investigated the mechanism of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) beta2 gene silencing in breast cancer cells. Transfection experiments indicated that MCF-7 cells transactivate an exogenous beta2 promoter (-1470/+156) to the same extent as MTSV1.7 breast epithelial cells, which express endogenous RARbeta2. This was true even in the context of replicated chromatin, suggesting a cis-acting rather than a trans-acting defect. Cytosine methylation, a cis-acting DNA modification, has been implicated in RARbeta2 silencing in cancer cells. Upon bisulfite genomic sequencing, we found that 3 CpG sites in the beta2 RARE region were variably methylated in MCF-7 cells but were not methylated in MTSV1.7 cells or in 2 MDA-MB-231 subclones that differed in RARbeta2 expression (high in clone A2, low in clone A4). However, the 5'-UTR region was hypermethylated in clone A4 relative to clone A2 cells. Following 5-azacytidine treatment, RA and trichostatin A markedly induced RARbeta2 expression in MCF-7 cells but not in MDA-MB-231 clone A4 cells. A beta2 RARE reporter construct in which the methylation-susceptible cytosines in the sense strand were replaced by thymine displayed marked loss of activity in a replicated chromatin-dependent manner. We conclude that cytosine methylation contributes to RARbeta2 gene silencing in MCF-7 cells and that methylation of the RARE region may be particularly important. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4066 - 4070.

A distinctive feature of BRCA1-linked breast cancers is that they typically do not express estrogen receptor-alpha (ER(alpha)). Previous investigation suggests that methylation of CpGs within the ER(alpha) promoter mediates repression of gene expression in some ER(alpha)-negative breast cancers. To determine if methylation of CpGs within the ER(alpha) promoter is associated with BRCA1-linked breast cancers, we evaluated methylation in exon 1 of the ER(alpha) gene in 40 ER(alpha)-negative breast cancers, 20 of which were non BRCA1-linked and 20 BRCA1-linked. CpG methylation was evaluated by either methylation-sensitive restriction digest (HpaII), methylation-sensitive PCR (MSP), or direct sequencing of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA. Results from HpaII digests and MSP documented a high degree of methylation, the MSP data showing slightly higher methylation in the BRCA1-linked group. CpGs analysed by direct sequencing showed an overall average methylation of 25% among non BRCA1-linked cancers and 40% among BRCA1-linked cancers (P=0.0031). The most notable difference was found at five particular CpGs, each of which exhibited a greater than twofold increase in methylation in the BRCA1-linked group compared to the non BRCA1-linked group (P<0.03 for each CpG). Methylation of certain critical CpGs may represent an important factor in transcriptional repression of the ER(alpha) gene in BRCA1-linked breast cancers.. A distinctive feature of BRCA1-linked breast cancers is that they typically do not express estrogen receptor-alpha (ER(alpha)). Previous investigation suggests that methylation of CpGs within the ER(alpha) promoter mediates repression of gene expression in some ER(alpha)-negative breast cancers. To determine if methylation of CpGs within the ER(alpha) promoter is associated with BRCA1-linked breast cancers, we evaluated methylation in exon 1 of the ER(alpha) gene in 40 ER(alpha)-negative breast cancers, 20 of which were non BRCA1-linked and 20 BRCA1-linked. CpG methylation was evaluated by either methylation-sensitive restriction digest (HpaII), methylation-sensitive PCR (MSP), or direct sequencing of bisulfite-treated genomic DNA. Results from HpaII digests and MSP documented a high degree of methylation, the MSP data showing slightly higher methylation in the BRCA1-linked group. CpGs analysed by direct sequencing showed an overall average methylation of 25% among non BRCA1-linked cancers and 40% among BRCA1-linked cancers (P=0.0031). The most notable difference was found at five particular CpGs, each of which exhibited a greater than twofold increase in methylation in the BRCA1-linked group compared to the non BRCA1-linked group (P<0.03 for each CpG). Methylation of certain critical CpGs may represent an important factor in transcriptional repression of the ER(alpha) gene in BRCA1-linked breast cancers.

Epigenetic drugs are promising add-ons to cancer treatment; still, adverse effects concerning tumour promotion have been reported occasionally. In this in vitro study, we investigated the effect of combination treatment of decitabine with anthracycline-based chemotherapy [5-fluorouracil plus epirubicine plus cyclophosphamide (FEC)] on viability and metastatic activity of breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 (estrogen receptor-negative) and MCF-7 (estrogen receptor-positive). The effect of decitabine and its combined treatment with FEC on viability of both cancer cell lines was assessed using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) cell survival assays. DNA methylation specific real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Methylight(R)) was employed to document the methylation status of the metastasis-relevant urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-I (PAI-1) genes. Additionally, protein expression levels of uPA and PAI-1 were determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Invasion capacity of cells was assayed using Matrigel(R) invasion assay. Decitabine lowered the viability of MCF-7 cells, although MDA-MB-231 cells were not affected. Decitabine did not augment FEC-mediated cytotoxicity in both cell lines. In MCF-7 cells, methylation of the uPA and PAI-1 gene promoter was significantly reduced by decitabine or decitabine plus FEC. Protein levels of uPA and PAI-1 were induced by all treatments. Decitabine significantly induced the invasion capacity of MCF-7 cells, whereas all of the drugs resulted in decreased invasion capacity of MDA-MB-231. Our results suggest differential effects of single-dose decitabine and its combination with FEC on the metastatic capacity and survival of breast cancer cell lines endowed with different metastatic behaviour.. Epigenetic drugs are promising add-ons to cancer treatment; still, adverse effects concerning tumour promotion have been reported occasionally. In this in vitro study, we investigated the effect of combination treatment of decitabine with anthracycline-based chemotherapy [5-fluorouracil plus epirubicine plus cyclophosphamide (FEC)] on viability and metastatic activity of breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 (estrogen receptor-negative) and MCF-7 (estrogen receptor-positive). The effect of decitabine and its combined treatment with FEC on viability of both cancer cell lines was assessed using the 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) cell survival assays. DNA methylation specific real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Methylight(R)) was employed to document the methylation status of the metastasis-relevant urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-I (PAI-1) genes. Additionally, protein expression levels of uPA and PAI-1 were determined using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Invasion capacity of cells was assayed using Matrigel(R) invasion assay. Decitabine lowered the viability of MCF-7 cells, although MDA-MB-231 cells were not affected. Decitabine did not augment FEC-mediated cytotoxicity in both cell lines. In MCF-7 cells, methylation of the uPA and PAI-1 gene promoter was significantly reduced by decitabine or decitabine plus FEC. Protein levels of uPA and PAI-1 were induced by all treatments. Decitabine significantly induced the invasion capacity of MCF-7 cells, whereas all of the drugs resulted in decreased invasion capacity of MDA-MB-231. Our results suggest differential effects of single-dose decitabine and its combination with FEC on the metastatic capacity and survival of breast cancer cell lines endowed with different metastatic behaviour.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant promoter hypermethylation has been recognized in human breast carcinogenesis as a frequent molecular alteration associated with the loss of expression of a number of key regulatory genes and may serve as a biomarker. The E-cadherin gene (CDH1), mapping at chromosome 16q22, is an intercellular adhesion molecule in epithelial cells, which plays an important role in establishing and maintaining intercellular connections. The aim of our study was to assess the methylation pattern of CDH1 and to correlate it with the expression of E-cadherin, clinicopathological parameters and hormone receptor status in breast cancer patients of Kashmir. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation specific PCR (MSP) was used to determine the methylation status of CDH1 in 128 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) paired with the corresponding normal tissue samples. Immunohistochemistry was used to study the expression of E-cadherin, ER and PR. RESULTS: CDH1 hypermethylation was detected in 57.8% of cases and 14.8% of normal adjacent controls. Reduced levels of E-cadherin protein were observed in 71.9% of our samples. Loss of E-cadherin expression was significantly associated with the CDH1 promoter region methylation (p<0.05, OR=3.48, CI: 1.55-7.79). Hypermethylation of CDH1 was significantly associated with age at diagnosis (p=0.030), tumor size (p=0.008), tumor grade (p=0.024) and rate of node positivity or metastasis (p=0.043). CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings suggest that abnormal CDH1 methylation occurs in high frequencies in infiltrating breast cancers associated with a decrease in E-cadherin expression. We found significant differences in tumor-related CDH1 gene methylation patterns relevant to tumor grade, tumor size, nodal involvement and age at diagnosis of breast tumors, which could be extended in future to provide diagnostic and prognostic information.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant promoter hypermethylation has been recognized in human breast carcinogenesis as a frequent molecular alteration associated with the loss of expression of a number of key regulatory genes and may serve as a biomarker. The E-cadherin gene (CDH1), mapping at chromosome 16q22, is an intercellular adhesion molecule in epithelial cells, which plays an important role in establishing and maintaining intercellular connections. The aim of our study was to assess the methylation pattern of CDH1 and to correlate it with the expression of E-cadherin, clinicopathological parameters and hormone receptor status in breast cancer patients of Kashmir. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation specific PCR (MSP) was used to determine the methylation status of CDH1 in 128 invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) paired with the corresponding normal tissue samples. Immunohistochemistry was used to study the expression of E-cadherin, ER and PR. RESULTS: CDH1 hypermethylation was detected in 57.8% of cases and 14.8% of normal adjacent controls. Reduced levels of E-cadherin protein were observed in 71.9% of our samples. Loss of E-cadherin expression was significantly associated with the CDH1 promoter region methylation (p<0.05, OR=3.48, CI: 1.55-7.79). Hypermethylation of CDH1 was significantly associated with age at diagnosis (p=0.030), tumor size (p=0.008), tumor grade (p=0.024) and rate of node positivity or metastasis (p=0.043). CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings suggest that abnormal CDH1 methylation occurs in high frequencies in infiltrating breast cancers associated with a decrease in E-cadherin expression. We found significant differences in tumor-related CDH1 gene methylation patterns relevant to tumor grade, tumor size, nodal involvement and age at diagnosis of breast tumors, which could be extended in future to provide diagnostic and prognostic information.

Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation are being increasingly recognized to play an important role in cancer and may serve as a cancer biomarker. The aim of this study was to evaluate the promoter methylation status of MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) and a possible correlation with the expression of MGMT and standard clinicopathological parameters in invasive ductal breast carcinoma patients (IDC) of Kashmir. Methylation-specific PCR was carried out to investigate the promoter methylation status of MGMT in breast tumors paired with the corresponding normal tissue samples from 128 breast cancer patients. The effect of promoter methylation on protein expression in the primary breast cancer and adjacent normal tissues was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (n = 128) and western blotting (n = 30). The frequency of tumor hypermethylation was 39.8 % and a significant difference in methylation frequency among breast tumors were found (p < 0.001) when compared with the corresponding normal tissue. Immunohistochemical analysis showed no detectable expression of MGMT in 68/128 (53.1 %) tumors. MGMT promoter methylation mediated gene silencing was associated with loss of its protein expression (rs = -0.285, p = 0.001, OR = 3.38, 95 % CI = 1.59-7.17). A significant correlation was seen between loss of MGMT and lymph node involvement (p = 0.030), tumor grade (p < 0.0001), loss of estrogen receptors (ER; p = 0.021) and progesterone receptors (PR) (p = 0.016). Also, MGMT methylation was found to be associated with tumor grade (p = 0.011), tumor stage (p = 0.009), and loss of ER (p = 0.003) and PR receptors (p = 0.009). To our knowledge, our findings, for the first time, in Kashmiri population, indicate that MGMT is aberrantly methylated in breast cancer and promoter hypermethylation could be attributed to silencing of MGMT gene expression in breast cancer. Our data suggests that MGMT promoter hypermethylation could have a potential function as molecular biomarker of breast oncogenesis. Also, based on their predictive value of response to therapy, the immunohistochemical evaluation and interpretation of MGMT may also help in future to establish therapeutic strategies for patients with breast cancer.. Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation are being increasingly recognized to play an important role in cancer and may serve as a cancer biomarker. The aim of this study was to evaluate the promoter methylation status of MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) and a possible correlation with the expression of MGMT and standard clinicopathological parameters in invasive ductal breast carcinoma patients (IDC) of Kashmir. Methylation-specific PCR was carried out to investigate the promoter methylation status of MGMT in breast tumors paired with the corresponding normal tissue samples from 128 breast cancer patients. The effect of promoter methylation on protein expression in the primary breast cancer and adjacent normal tissues was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (n = 128) and western blotting (n = 30). The frequency of tumor hypermethylation was 39.8 % and a significant difference in methylation frequency among breast tumors were found (p < 0.001) when compared with the corresponding normal tissue. Immunohistochemical analysis showed no detectable expression of MGMT in 68/128 (53.1 %) tumors. MGMT promoter methylation mediated gene silencing was associated with loss of its protein expression (rs = -0.285, p = 0.001, OR = 3.38, 95 % CI = 1.59-7.17). A significant correlation was seen between loss of MGMT and lymph node involvement (p = 0.030), tumor grade (p < 0.0001), loss of estrogen receptors (ER; p = 0.021) and progesterone receptors (PR) (p = 0.016). Also, MGMT methylation was found to be associated with tumor grade (p = 0.011), tumor stage (p = 0.009), and loss of ER (p = 0.003) and PR receptors (p = 0.009). To our knowledge, our findings, for the first time, in Kashmiri population, indicate that MGMT is aberrantly methylated in breast cancer and promoter hypermethylation could be attributed to silencing of MGMT gene expression in breast cancer. Our data suggests that MGMT promoter hypermethylation could have a potential function as molecular biomarker of breast oncogenesis. Also, based on their predictive value of response to therapy, the immunohistochemical evaluation and interpretation of MGMT may also help in future to establish therapeutic strategies for patients with breast cancer.

High-risk breast cancer comprises distinct tumor entities such as triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) which is characterized by lack of estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) and the HER2 receptor and breast malignancies which have spread to more than three lymph nodes. For such patients, current (inter)national guidelines recommend anthracycline-based chemotherapy as the standard of care, but not all patients do equally benefit from such a chemotherapy. To further improve therapy decision-making, predictive biomarkers are of high, so far unmet, medical need. In this respect, predictive biomarkers would permit patient selection for a particular kind of chemotherapy and, by this, guide physicians to optimize the treatment plan for each patient individually. Besides DNA mutations, DNA methylation as a patient selection marker has received increasing clinical attention. For instance, significant evidence has accumulated that methylation of the PITX2 (paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2) gene might serve as a novel predictive and prognostic biomarker, for a variety of cancer diseases. This review highlights the current understanding of treatment modalities of high-risk breast cancer patients with a focus on recommended treatment options, with special attention on the future clinical application of PITX2 as a predictive biomarker to personalize breast cancer management.. High-risk breast cancer comprises distinct tumor entities such as triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) which is characterized by lack of estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) and the HER2 receptor and breast malignancies which have spread to more than three lymph nodes. For such patients, current (inter)national guidelines recommend anthracycline-based chemotherapy as the standard of care, but not all patients do equally benefit from such a chemotherapy. To further improve therapy decision-making, predictive biomarkers are of high, so far unmet, medical need. In this respect, predictive biomarkers would permit patient selection for a particular kind of chemotherapy and, by this, guide physicians to optimize the treatment plan for each patient individually. Besides DNA mutations, DNA methylation as a patient selection marker has received increasing clinical attention. For instance, significant evidence has accumulated that methylation of the PITX2 (paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2) gene might serve as a novel predictive and prognostic biomarker, for a variety of cancer diseases. This review highlights the current understanding of treatment modalities of high-risk breast cancer patients with a focus on recommended treatment options, with special attention on the future clinical application of PITX2 as a predictive biomarker to personalize breast cancer management.

BACKGROUND: The global effect of copy number and epigenetic alterations on miRNA expression in cancer is poorly understood. In the present study, we integrate genome-wide DNA methylation, copy number and miRNA expression and identify genetic mechanisms underlying miRNA dysregulation in breast cancer. RESULTS: We identify 70 miRNAs whose expression was associated with alterations in copy number or methylation, or both. Among these, five miRNA families are represented. Interestingly, the members of these families are encoded on different chromosomes and are complementarily altered by gain or hypomethylation across the patients. In an independent breast cancer cohort of 123 patients, 41 of the 70 miRNAs were confirmed with respect to aberration pattern and association to expression. In vitro functional experiments were performed in breast cancer cell lines with miRNA mimics to evaluate the phenotype of the replicated miRNAs. let-7e-3p, which in tumors is found associated with hypermethylation, is shown to induce apoptosis and reduce cell viability, and low let-7e-3p expression is associated with poorer prognosis. The overexpression of three other miRNAs associated with copy number gain, miR-21-3p, miR-148b-3p and miR-151a-5p, increases proliferation of breast cancer cell lines. In addition, miR-151a-5p enhances the levels of phosphorylated AKT protein. CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide novel evidence of the mechanisms behind miRNA dysregulation in breast cancer. The study contributes to the understanding of how methylation and copy number alterations influence miRNA expression, emphasizing miRNA functionality through redundant encoding, and suggests novel miRNAs important in breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: The global effect of copy number and epigenetic alterations on miRNA expression in cancer is poorly understood. In the present study, we integrate genome-wide DNA methylation, copy number and miRNA expression and identify genetic mechanisms underlying miRNA dysregulation in breast cancer. RESULTS: We identify 70 miRNAs whose expression was associated with alterations in copy number or methylation, or both. Among these, five miRNA families are represented. Interestingly, the members of these families are encoded on different chromosomes and are complementarily altered by gain or hypomethylation across the patients. In an independent breast cancer cohort of 123 patients, 41 of the 70 miRNAs were confirmed with respect to aberration pattern and association to expression. In vitro functional experiments were performed in breast cancer cell lines with miRNA mimics to evaluate the phenotype of the replicated miRNAs. let-7e-3p, which in tumors is found associated with hypermethylation, is shown to induce apoptosis and reduce cell viability, and low let-7e-3p expression is associated with poorer prognosis. The overexpression of three other miRNAs associated with copy number gain, miR-21-3p, miR-148b-3p and miR-151a-5p, increases proliferation of breast cancer cell lines. In addition, miR-151a-5p enhances the levels of phosphorylated AKT protein. CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide novel evidence of the mechanisms behind miRNA dysregulation in breast cancer. The study contributes to the understanding of how methylation and copy number alterations influence miRNA expression, emphasizing miRNA functionality through redundant encoding, and suggests novel miRNAs important in breast cancer.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a particularly important breast cancer subtype with an aggressive clinical phenotype that is associated with a higher likelihood of metastasis. This subtype is characterized by an absence of the estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptors, as well as the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/HER neu). The absence of the three receptors significantly reduces targeted treatment options for patients with TNBC and as such, there is an urgent need to identify novel treatment targets. Here, we provide detailed information regarding the design of a multi-platform dataset that describes genome-wide assessment of miRNA (assessed by microarray, GSE38167) and gene expression (assessed by microarray, GSE61723), as well as methylation (assessed by Illumina HM450K BeadChip, GSE78751) in TNBCs, matched normal adjacent tissues and matched lymph node metastases. The use of this multi-platform dataset is likely to uncover novel markers and key pathways involved in progression to lymph node metastasis in TNBC.. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a particularly important breast cancer subtype with an aggressive clinical phenotype that is associated with a higher likelihood of metastasis. This subtype is characterized by an absence of the estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptors, as well as the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/HER neu). The absence of the three receptors significantly reduces targeted treatment options for patients with TNBC and as such, there is an urgent need to identify novel treatment targets. Here, we provide detailed information regarding the design of a multi-platform dataset that describes genome-wide assessment of miRNA (assessed by microarray, GSE38167) and gene expression (assessed by microarray, GSE61723), as well as methylation (assessed by Illumina HM450K BeadChip, GSE78751) in TNBCs, matched normal adjacent tissues and matched lymph node metastases. The use of this multi-platform dataset is likely to uncover novel markers and key pathways involved in progression to lymph node metastasis in TNBC.

Cancer is a heterogeneous and tissue-specific disease. Thus, the tissue of origin reflects on the natural history of the disease and dictates the therapeutic approach. It is suggested that tissue differentiation, mediated mostly by epigenetic modifications, could guide tissue-specific susceptibility and protective mechanisms against cancer. Here we studied breast specific methylation in purified normal epithelium and its reflection in breast cancers. We established genome wide methylation profiles of various normal epithelial tissues and identified 110 genes that were differentially methylated in normal breast epithelium. A number of these genes also showed methylation alterations in breast cancers. We elaborated on one of them, TRIM29 (ATDC), and showed that its promoter was hypo-methylated in normal breast epithelium and heavily methylated in other normal epithelial tissues. Moreover, in breast carcinomas methylation increased and expression decreased whereas the reverse was noted for multiple other carcinomas. Interestingly, TRIM29 regulation in breast tumors clustered according to the PAM50 classification. Thus, it was repressed in the estrogen receptor positive tumors, particularly in the more proliferative luminal B subtype. This goes in line with previous reports indicating tumor suppressive activity of TRIM29 in estrogen receptor positive luminal breast cells in contrast to oncogenic function in pancreatic and lung cancers. Overall, these findings emphasize the linkage between breast specific epigenetic regulation and tissue specificity of cancer.. Cancer is a heterogeneous and tissue-specific disease. Thus, the tissue of origin reflects on the natural history of the disease and dictates the therapeutic approach. It is suggested that tissue differentiation, mediated mostly by epigenetic modifications, could guide tissue-specific susceptibility and protective mechanisms against cancer. Here we studied breast specific methylation in purified normal epithelium and its reflection in breast cancers. We established genome wide methylation profiles of various normal epithelial tissues and identified 110 genes that were differentially methylated in normal breast epithelium. A number of these genes also showed methylation alterations in breast cancers. We elaborated on one of them, TRIM29 (ATDC), and showed that its promoter was hypo-methylated in normal breast epithelium and heavily methylated in other normal epithelial tissues. Moreover, in breast carcinomas methylation increased and expression decreased whereas the reverse was noted for multiple other carcinomas. Interestingly, TRIM29 regulation in breast tumors clustered according to the PAM50 classification. Thus, it was repressed in the estrogen receptor positive tumors, particularly in the more proliferative luminal B subtype. This goes in line with previous reports indicating tumor suppressive activity of TRIM29 in estrogen receptor positive luminal breast cells in contrast to oncogenic function in pancreatic and lung cancers. Overall, these findings emphasize the linkage between breast specific epigenetic regulation and tissue specificity of cancer.

Patients with large or nonoperable breast cancers often receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy to facilitate full resection of the tumor and enable conservation of the breast. However, currently available methods for evaluation of response during therapy are limited and the actual effect of the treatment is only recognized at surgery upon completion of chemotherapy. Timely assessment of response could allow individual tailoring of the treatment and save noneffective drugs and unnecessary toxicity. Here, we suggest that tumor derived DNA methylation in the serum may reflect changes in tumor burden and allow early recognition of responders versus nonresponders. In this pilot study, we collected 7 consecutive serum samples from 52 patients with locally advanced breast cancer during neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We selected RASSF1, which was methylated in more than 80% of the tumors, for serum analysis. Using the "methylation sensitive PCR and high resolution melting," we detected RASSF1 methylation in the serum of 21 patients prior to therapy. In four patients who achieved complete pathological response, RASSF1 methylation in the serum became undetectable early during therapy. In contrast, in 17 patients that had partial or minimal pathological response, serum RASSF1 methylation persisted longer or throughout the treatment (complete versus partial response p = 0.02). These findings support further development of this assay for monitoring response during neoadjuvant therapy.. Patients with large or nonoperable breast cancers often receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy to facilitate full resection of the tumor and enable conservation of the breast. However, currently available methods for evaluation of response during therapy are limited and the actual effect of the treatment is only recognized at surgery upon completion of chemotherapy. Timely assessment of response could allow individual tailoring of the treatment and save noneffective drugs and unnecessary toxicity. Here, we suggest that tumor derived DNA methylation in the serum may reflect changes in tumor burden and allow early recognition of responders versus nonresponders. In this pilot study, we collected 7 consecutive serum samples from 52 patients with locally advanced breast cancer during neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We selected RASSF1, which was methylated in more than 80% of the tumors, for serum analysis. Using the "methylation sensitive PCR and high resolution melting," we detected RASSF1 methylation in the serum of 21 patients prior to therapy. In four patients who achieved complete pathological response, RASSF1 methylation in the serum became undetectable early during therapy. In contrast, in 17 patients that had partial or minimal pathological response, serum RASSF1 methylation persisted longer or throughout the treatment (complete versus partial response p = 0.02). These findings support further development of this assay for monitoring response during neoadjuvant therapy.

BACKGROUND: There is a body of evidence that shows a link between tumorigenesis and ribosome biogenesis. The precursor of mature 18S, 28S and 5.8S ribosomal RNAs is transcribed from the ribosomal DNA gene (rDNA), which exists as 300-400 copies in the human diploid genome. Approximately one half of these copies are epigenetically silenced, but the exact role of epigenetic regulation on ribosome biogenesis is not completely understood. In this study we analyzed the methylation profiles of the rDNA promoter and of the 5' regions of 18S and 28S in breast cancer. METHODS: We analyzed rDNA methylation in 68 breast cancer tissues of which the normal counterpart was partially available (45/68 samples) using the MassARRAY EpiTYPER assay, a sensitive and quantitative method with single base resolution. RESULTS: We found that rDNA locus tended to be hypermethylated in tumor compared to matched normal breast tissues and that the DNA methylation level of several CpG units within the rDNA locus was associated to nuclear grade and to nucleolar size of tumor tissues. In addition we identified a subgroup of samples in which large nucleoli were associated with very limited or absent rDNA hypermethylation in tumor respect to matched normal tissue. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we suggest that rDNA is an important target of epigenetic regulation in breast tumors and that rDNA methylation level is associated to nucleolar size.. BACKGROUND: There is a body of evidence that shows a link between tumorigenesis and ribosome biogenesis. The precursor of mature 18S, 28S and 5.8S ribosomal RNAs is transcribed from the ribosomal DNA gene (rDNA), which exists as 300-400 copies in the human diploid genome. Approximately one half of these copies are epigenetically silenced, but the exact role of epigenetic regulation on ribosome biogenesis is not completely understood. In this study we analyzed the methylation profiles of the rDNA promoter and of the 5' regions of 18S and 28S in breast cancer. METHODS: We analyzed rDNA methylation in 68 breast cancer tissues of which the normal counterpart was partially available (45/68 samples) using the MassARRAY EpiTYPER assay, a sensitive and quantitative method with single base resolution. RESULTS: We found that rDNA locus tended to be hypermethylated in tumor compared to matched normal breast tissues and that the DNA methylation level of several CpG units within the rDNA locus was associated to nuclear grade and to nucleolar size of tumor tissues. In addition we identified a subgroup of samples in which large nucleoli were associated with very limited or absent rDNA hypermethylation in tumor respect to matched normal tissue. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we suggest that rDNA is an important target of epigenetic regulation in breast tumors and that rDNA methylation level is associated to nucleolar size.

The triple-negative breast cancer subtype is highly aggressive and has no defined therapeutic target. Fyn-related kinase (FRK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase, reported to be downregulated in breast cancer and gliomas, where it is suggested to have tumor suppressor activity. We examined the expression profile of FRK in a panel of 40 breast cancer cells representing all the major subtypes, as well as in 4 non-malignant mammary epithelial cell lines. We found that FRK expression was significantly repressed in a proportion of basal B breast cancer cell lines. We then determined the mechanism of suppression of FRK in FRK-low or negative cell lines. In silico analyses of the FRK promoter region led to the identification of at least 17 CpG sites. Bisulphite sequencing of the promoter region revealed that two of these sites were consistently methylated in FRK-low/negative cell lines and especially in the basal B breast cancer subtype. We further show that treatment of these cells with histone deacetylase inhibitors, Entinostat and Mocetinostat' promoted re-expression of FRK mRNA and protein. Further, using luciferase reporter assays, we show that both GATA3-binding protein FOG1 and constitutively active STAT5A increased the activity of FRK promoter. Together, our results present the first evidence that site-specific promoter methylation contributes to the repression of FRK more so in basal B breast cancers. Our study also highlights the potential clinical significance of targeting FRK using epigenetic drugs specifically in basal B breast cancers which are usually triple negative and very aggressive.. The triple-negative breast cancer subtype is highly aggressive and has no defined therapeutic target. Fyn-related kinase (FRK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase, reported to be downregulated in breast cancer and gliomas, where it is suggested to have tumor suppressor activity. We examined the expression profile of FRK in a panel of 40 breast cancer cells representing all the major subtypes, as well as in 4 non-malignant mammary epithelial cell lines. We found that FRK expression was significantly repressed in a proportion of basal B breast cancer cell lines. We then determined the mechanism of suppression of FRK in FRK-low or negative cell lines. In silico analyses of the FRK promoter region led to the identification of at least 17 CpG sites. Bisulphite sequencing of the promoter region revealed that two of these sites were consistently methylated in FRK-low/negative cell lines and especially in the basal B breast cancer subtype. We further show that treatment of these cells with histone deacetylase inhibitors, Entinostat and Mocetinostat' promoted re-expression of FRK mRNA and protein. Further, using luciferase reporter assays, we show that both GATA3-binding protein FOG1 and constitutively active STAT5A increased the activity of FRK promoter. Together, our results present the first evidence that site-specific promoter methylation contributes to the repression of FRK more so in basal B breast cancers. Our study also highlights the potential clinical significance of targeting FRK using epigenetic drugs specifically in basal B breast cancers which are usually triple negative and very aggressive.

BACKGROUND: The CBFA2T3 locus located on the human chromosome region 16q24.3 is frequently deleted in breast tumors. CBFA2T3 gene expression levels are aberrant in breast tumor cell lines and the CBFA2T3B isoform is a potential tumor suppressor gene. In the absence of identified mutations to further support a role for this gene in tumorigenesis, we explored whether the CBFA2T3B promoter region is aberrantly methylated and whether this correlates with expression. RESULTS: Aberrant hypo and hypermethylation of the CBFA2T3B promoter was detected in breast tumor cell lines and primary breast tumor samples relative to methylation index interquartile ranges in normal breast counterpart and normal whole blood samples. A statistically significant inverse correlation between aberrant CBFA2T3B promoter methylation and gene expression was established. CONCLUSION: CBFA2T3B is a potential breast tumor suppressor gene affected by aberrant promoter methylation and gene expression. The methylation levels were quantitated using a second-round real-time methylation-specific PCR assay. The detection of both hypo and hypermethylation is a technicality regarding the methylation methodology.. BACKGROUND: The CBFA2T3 locus located on the human chromosome region 16q24.3 is frequently deleted in breast tumors. CBFA2T3 gene expression levels are aberrant in breast tumor cell lines and the CBFA2T3B isoform is a potential tumor suppressor gene. In the absence of identified mutations to further support a role for this gene in tumorigenesis, we explored whether the CBFA2T3B promoter region is aberrantly methylated and whether this correlates with expression. RESULTS: Aberrant hypo and hypermethylation of the CBFA2T3B promoter was detected in breast tumor cell lines and primary breast tumor samples relative to methylation index interquartile ranges in normal breast counterpart and normal whole blood samples. A statistically significant inverse correlation between aberrant CBFA2T3B promoter methylation and gene expression was established. CONCLUSION: CBFA2T3B is a potential breast tumor suppressor gene affected by aberrant promoter methylation and gene expression. The methylation levels were quantitated using a second-round real-time methylation-specific PCR assay. The detection of both hypo and hypermethylation is a technicality regarding the methylation methodology.

BACKGROUND: Breast-cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) gene encodes for a predominantly nuclear protein that differentially regulates the expression of multiple genes, leading to suppression of metastasis without blocking orthotropic tumour growth. The aim of the present study was to evaluate for the first time the prognostic significance of BRMS1 promoter methylation in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in plasma of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Towards this goal, we examined the methylation status of BRMS1 promoter in NSCLC tissues, matched adjacent non-cancerous tissues and corresponding cfDNA as well as in an independent cohort of patients with advanced NSCLC and healthy individuals. METHODS: Methylation of BRMS1 promoter was examined in 57 NSCLC tumours and adjacent non-cancerous tissues, in cfDNA isolated from 48 corresponding plasma samples, in cfDNA isolated from plasma of 74 patients with advanced NSCLC and 24 healthy individuals. RESULTS: The BRMS1 promoter was highly methylated both in operable NSCLC primary tissues (59.6%) and in corresponding cfDNA (47.9%) but not in cfDNA from healthy individuals (0%), while it was also highly methylated in cfDNA from advanced NSCLC patients (63.5%). In operable NSCLC, Kaplan-Meier estimates were significantly different in favour of patients with non-methylated BRMS1 promoter in cfDNA, concerning both disease-free interval (DFI) (P=0.048) and overall survival (OS) (P=0.007). In advanced NSCLC, OS was significantly different in favour of patients with non-methylated BRMS1 promoter in their cfDNA (P=0.003). Multivariate analysis confirmed that BRMS1 promoter methylation has a statistical significant influence both on operable NSCLC patients' DFI time and OS and on advanced NSCLC patients' PFS and OS. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of BRMS1 promoter in cfDNA isolated from plasma of NSCLC patients provides important prognostic information and merits to be further evaluated as a circulating tumour biomarker.. BACKGROUND: Breast-cancer metastasis suppressor 1 (BRMS1) gene encodes for a predominantly nuclear protein that differentially regulates the expression of multiple genes, leading to suppression of metastasis without blocking orthotropic tumour growth. The aim of the present study was to evaluate for the first time the prognostic significance of BRMS1 promoter methylation in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in plasma of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Towards this goal, we examined the methylation status of BRMS1 promoter in NSCLC tissues, matched adjacent non-cancerous tissues and corresponding cfDNA as well as in an independent cohort of patients with advanced NSCLC and healthy individuals. METHODS: Methylation of BRMS1 promoter was examined in 57 NSCLC tumours and adjacent non-cancerous tissues, in cfDNA isolated from 48 corresponding plasma samples, in cfDNA isolated from plasma of 74 patients with advanced NSCLC and 24 healthy individuals. RESULTS: The BRMS1 promoter was highly methylated both in operable NSCLC primary tissues (59.6%) and in corresponding cfDNA (47.9%) but not in cfDNA from healthy individuals (0%), while it was also highly methylated in cfDNA from advanced NSCLC patients (63.5%). In operable NSCLC, Kaplan-Meier estimates were significantly different in favour of patients with non-methylated BRMS1 promoter in cfDNA, concerning both disease-free interval (DFI) (P=0.048) and overall survival (OS) (P=0.007). In advanced NSCLC, OS was significantly different in favour of patients with non-methylated BRMS1 promoter in their cfDNA (P=0.003). Multivariate analysis confirmed that BRMS1 promoter methylation has a statistical significant influence both on operable NSCLC patients' DFI time and OS and on advanced NSCLC patients' PFS and OS. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of BRMS1 promoter in cfDNA isolated from plasma of NSCLC patients provides important prognostic information and merits to be further evaluated as a circulating tumour biomarker.

Keap1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1) is an adaptor protein that mediates the ubiquitination/degradation of genes regulating cell survival and apoptosis under oxidative stress conditions. We determined methylation status of the KEAP1 promoter in 102 primary breast cancers, 14 pre-invasive lesions, 38 paired normal breast tissues and 6 normal breast from reductive mammoplasty by quantitative methylation specific PCR (QMSP). Aberrant promoter methylation was detected in 52 out of the 102 primary breast cancer cases (51%) and 10 out of 14 pre-invasive lesions (71%). No mutations of the KEAP1 gene were identified in the 20 breast cancer cases analyzed by fluorescence based direct sequencing. Methylation was more frequent in the subgroup of patients identified as ER positive-HER2 negative tumors (66.7%) as compared with triple-negative breast cancers (35%) (p = 0.05, Chi-square test). The impact of the interactions between Er, PgR, Her2 expression and KEAP1 methylation on mortality was investigated by RECPAM multivariable statistical analysis, identifying four prognostic classes at different mortality risks. Triple-negative breast cancer patients with KEAP1 methylation had higher mortality risk than patients without triple-negative breast cancer (HR = 14.73, 95%CI: 3.65-59.37). Both univariable and multivariable COX regressions analyses showed that KEAP1 methylation was associated with a better progression free survival in patients treated with epirubicin/cyclophosfamide and docetaxel as sequential chemotherapy (HR = 0.082; 95%CI: 0.007-0.934). These results indicate that aberrant promoter methylation of the KEAP1 gene is involved in breast cancerogenesis. In addition, identifying patients with KEAP1 epigenetic abnormalities may contribute to disease progression prediction in breast cancer patients.. Keap1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1) is an adaptor protein that mediates the ubiquitination/degradation of genes regulating cell survival and apoptosis under oxidative stress conditions. We determined methylation status of the KEAP1 promoter in 102 primary breast cancers, 14 pre-invasive lesions, 38 paired normal breast tissues and 6 normal breast from reductive mammoplasty by quantitative methylation specific PCR (QMSP). Aberrant promoter methylation was detected in 52 out of the 102 primary breast cancer cases (51%) and 10 out of 14 pre-invasive lesions (71%). No mutations of the KEAP1 gene were identified in the 20 breast cancer cases analyzed by fluorescence based direct sequencing. Methylation was more frequent in the subgroup of patients identified as ER positive-HER2 negative tumors (66.7%) as compared with triple-negative breast cancers (35%) (p = 0.05, Chi-square test). The impact of the interactions between Er, PgR, Her2 expression and KEAP1 methylation on mortality was investigated by RECPAM multivariable statistical analysis, identifying four prognostic classes at different mortality risks. Triple-negative breast cancer patients with KEAP1 methylation had higher mortality risk than patients without triple-negative breast cancer (HR = 14.73, 95%CI: 3.65-59.37). Both univariable and multivariable COX regressions analyses showed that KEAP1 methylation was associated with a better progression free survival in patients treated with epirubicin/cyclophosfamide and docetaxel as sequential chemotherapy (HR = 0.082; 95%CI: 0.007-0.934). These results indicate that aberrant promoter methylation of the KEAP1 gene is involved in breast cancerogenesis. In addition, identifying patients with KEAP1 epigenetic abnormalities may contribute to disease progression prediction in breast cancer patients.

. 
Due to the heterogeneous nature of breast cancer and the widespread use of single-gene studies, there is limited knowledge of multi-gene, locus-specific DNA methylation patterns in relation to molecular subtype and clinical features. We, therefore, quantified DNA methylation of 70 candidate gene loci in 140 breast tumors and matched normal tissues and determined associations with gene expression and tumor subtype. Using Sequenom's EpiTYPER platform, approximately 1,200 CpGs were interrogated and revealed six DNA methylation patterns in breast tumors relative to matched normal tissue. Differential methylation of several gene loci was observed within all molecular subtypes, while other patterns were subtype-dependent. Methylation of numerous gene loci was inversely correlated with gene expression, and in some cases, this correlation was only observed within specific breast tumor subtypes. Our findings were validated on a larger set of tumors and matched adjacent normal tissue from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset, which utilized methylation data derived from both Illumina Infinium 27 and 450 k arrays. These findings highlight the need to control for subtype when interpreting DNA methylation results, and the importance of interrogating multiple CpGs across varied gene regions.. Due to the heterogeneous nature of breast cancer and the widespread use of single-gene studies, there is limited knowledge of multi-gene, locus-specific DNA methylation patterns in relation to molecular subtype and clinical features. We, therefore, quantified DNA methylation of 70 candidate gene loci in 140 breast tumors and matched normal tissues and determined associations with gene expression and tumor subtype. Using Sequenom's EpiTYPER platform, approximately 1,200 CpGs were interrogated and revealed six DNA methylation patterns in breast tumors relative to matched normal tissue. Differential methylation of several gene loci was observed within all molecular subtypes, while other patterns were subtype-dependent. Methylation of numerous gene loci was inversely correlated with gene expression, and in some cases, this correlation was only observed within specific breast tumor subtypes. Our findings were validated on a larger set of tumors and matched adjacent normal tissue from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset, which utilized methylation data derived from both Illumina Infinium 27 and 450 k arrays. These findings highlight the need to control for subtype when interpreting DNA methylation results, and the importance of interrogating multiple CpGs across varied gene regions.

The present study investigated promoter hypermethylation of TP53 regulatory pathways providing a potential link between epigenetic changes and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) alterations in breast cancer patients lacking a TP53 mutation. The possibility of using the cancer-specific alterations in serum samples as a blood-based test was also explored. Triple-matched samples (cancerous tissues, matched adjacent normal tissues and serum samples) from breast cancer patients were screened for TP53 mutations, and the promoter methylation profile of P14(ARF), MDM2, TP53 and PTEN genes was analyzed as well as mtDNA alterations, including D-loop mutations and mtDNA content. In the studied cohort, no mutation was found in TP53 (DNA-binding domain). Comparison of P14(ARF) and PTEN methylation patterns showed significant hypermethylation levels in tumor tissues (P < 0.05 and <0.01, respectively) whereas the TP53 tumor suppressor gene was not hypermethylated (P < 0.511). The proportion of PTEN methylation was significantly higher in serum than in the normal tissues and it has a significant correlation to tumor tissues (P < 0.05). mtDNA analysis revealed 36.36% somatic and 90.91% germline mutations in the D-loop region and also significant mtDNA depletion in tumor tissues (P < 0.01). In addition, the mtDNA content in matched serum was significantly lower than in the normal tissues (P < 0.05). These data can provide an insight into the management of a therapeutic approach based on the reversal of epigenetic silencing of the crucial genes involved in regulatory pathways of the tumor suppressor TP53. Additionally, release of significant aberrant methylated PTEN in matched serum samples might represent a promising biomarker for breast cancer.. The present study investigated promoter hypermethylation of TP53 regulatory pathways providing a potential link between epigenetic changes and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) alterations in breast cancer patients lacking a TP53 mutation. The possibility of using the cancer-specific alterations in serum samples as a blood-based test was also explored. Triple-matched samples (cancerous tissues, matched adjacent normal tissues and serum samples) from breast cancer patients were screened for TP53 mutations, and the promoter methylation profile of P14(ARF), MDM2, TP53 and PTEN genes was analyzed as well as mtDNA alterations, including D-loop mutations and mtDNA content. In the studied cohort, no mutation was found in TP53 (DNA-binding domain). Comparison of P14(ARF) and PTEN methylation patterns showed significant hypermethylation levels in tumor tissues (P < 0.05 and <0.01, respectively) whereas the TP53 tumor suppressor gene was not hypermethylated (P < 0.511). The proportion of PTEN methylation was significantly higher in serum than in the normal tissues and it has a significant correlation to tumor tissues (P < 0.05). mtDNA analysis revealed 36.36% somatic and 90.91% germline mutations in the D-loop region and also significant mtDNA depletion in tumor tissues (P < 0.01). In addition, the mtDNA content in matched serum was significantly lower than in the normal tissues (P < 0.05). These data can provide an insight into the management of a therapeutic approach based on the reversal of epigenetic silencing of the crucial genes involved in regulatory pathways of the tumor suppressor TP53. Additionally, release of significant aberrant methylated PTEN in matched serum samples might represent a promising biomarker for breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Invasion and metastasis are two important hallmarks of malignant tumors caused by complex genetic and epigenetic alterations. The present study investigated the contribution of aberrant methylation profiles of cancer related genes, APC, BIN1, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESR-b, GSTP1, P14 (ARF), P16 (CDKN2A), P21 (CDKN1A), PTEN, and TIMP3, in the matched axillary lymph node metastasis in comparison to the primary tumor tissue and the adjacent normal tissue from the same breast cancer patients to identify the potential of candidate genes methylation as metastatic markers. METHODS: The quantitative methylation analysis was performed using the SEQUENOM's EpiTYPER assay which relies on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). RESULTS: The quantitative DNA methylation analysis of the candidate genes showed higher methylation proportion in the primary tumor tissue than that of the matched normal tissue and the differences were significant for the APC, BIN1, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESR-b, P16, PTEN and TIMP3 promoter regions (P<0.05). Among those candidate methylated genes, APC, BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 displayed higher methylation proportion in the matched lymph node metastasis than that found in the normal tissue (P<0.05). The pathway analysis revealed that BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 have a role in prevention of neoplasm metastasis. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study showed methylation heterogeneity between primary tumors and metastatic lesion. The contribution of aberrant methylation alterations of BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 genes in lymph node metastasis might provide a further clue to establish useful biomarkers for screening metastasis.. BACKGROUND: Invasion and metastasis are two important hallmarks of malignant tumors caused by complex genetic and epigenetic alterations. The present study investigated the contribution of aberrant methylation profiles of cancer related genes, APC, BIN1, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESR-b, GSTP1, P14 (ARF), P16 (CDKN2A), P21 (CDKN1A), PTEN, and TIMP3, in the matched axillary lymph node metastasis in comparison to the primary tumor tissue and the adjacent normal tissue from the same breast cancer patients to identify the potential of candidate genes methylation as metastatic markers. METHODS: The quantitative methylation analysis was performed using the SEQUENOM's EpiTYPER assay which relies on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). RESULTS: The quantitative DNA methylation analysis of the candidate genes showed higher methylation proportion in the primary tumor tissue than that of the matched normal tissue and the differences were significant for the APC, BIN1, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESR-b, P16, PTEN and TIMP3 promoter regions (P<0.05). Among those candidate methylated genes, APC, BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 displayed higher methylation proportion in the matched lymph node metastasis than that found in the normal tissue (P<0.05). The pathway analysis revealed that BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 have a role in prevention of neoplasm metastasis. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study showed methylation heterogeneity between primary tumors and metastatic lesion. The contribution of aberrant methylation alterations of BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 genes in lymph node metastasis might provide a further clue to establish useful biomarkers for screening metastasis.

Epigenetic regulation of imprinted genes enables monoallelic expression according to parental origin, and its disruption is implicated in many cancers and developmental disorders. The expression of hormone receptors is significant in breast cancer because they are indicators of cancer cell growth rate and determine response to endocrine therapies. We investigated the frequency of aberrant events and variation in DNA methylation at nine imprinted sites in invasive breast cancer and examined the association with estrogen and progesterone receptor status. Breast tissue and blood from patients with invasive breast cancer (n = 38) and benign breast disease (n = 30) were compared with those from healthy individuals (n = 36), matched with the cancer patients by age at diagnosis, ethnicity, body mass index, menopausal status and familial history of cancer. DNA methylation and allele-specific expression were analyzed by pyrosequencing. Tumor-specific methylation changes at IGF2 DMR2 were observed in 59% of cancer patients, IGF2 DMR0 in 38%, DIRAS3 DMR in 36%, GRB10 ICR in 23%, PEG3 DMR in 21%, MEST ICR in 19%, H19 ICR in 18%, KvDMR in 8% and SNRPN/SNURF ICR in 4%. Variation in methylation was significantly greater in breast tissue from cancer patients compared with that in healthy individuals and benign breast disease. Aberrant methylation of three or more sites was significantly associated with negative estrogen-alpha (Fisher's exact test, p = 0.02) and progesterone-A (p = 0.02) receptor status. Aberrant events and increased variation in imprinted gene DNA methylation, therefore, seem to be frequent in invasive breast cancer and are associated with negative estrogen and progesterone receptor status, without loss of monoallelic expression.. Epigenetic regulation of imprinted genes enables monoallelic expression according to parental origin, and its disruption is implicated in many cancers and developmental disorders. The expression of hormone receptors is significant in breast cancer because they are indicators of cancer cell growth rate and determine response to endocrine therapies. We investigated the frequency of aberrant events and variation in DNA methylation at nine imprinted sites in invasive breast cancer and examined the association with estrogen and progesterone receptor status. Breast tissue and blood from patients with invasive breast cancer (n = 38) and benign breast disease (n = 30) were compared with those from healthy individuals (n = 36), matched with the cancer patients by age at diagnosis, ethnicity, body mass index, menopausal status and familial history of cancer. DNA methylation and allele-specific expression were analyzed by pyrosequencing. Tumor-specific methylation changes at IGF2 DMR2 were observed in 59% of cancer patients, IGF2 DMR0 in 38%, DIRAS3 DMR in 36%, GRB10 ICR in 23%, PEG3 DMR in 21%, MEST ICR in 19%, H19 ICR in 18%, KvDMR in 8% and SNRPN/SNURF ICR in 4%. Variation in methylation was significantly greater in breast tissue from cancer patients compared with that in healthy individuals and benign breast disease. Aberrant methylation of three or more sites was significantly associated with negative estrogen-alpha (Fisher's exact test, p = 0.02) and progesterone-A (p = 0.02) receptor status. Aberrant events and increased variation in imprinted gene DNA methylation, therefore, seem to be frequent in invasive breast cancer and are associated with negative estrogen and progesterone receptor status, without loss of monoallelic expression.

INTRODUCTION: Identification of gene expression based breast cancer subtypes is considered as a critical means of prognostication. Genetic mutations along with epigenetic alterations contribute to gene expression changes occurring in breast cancer. So far, these epigenetic contributions to sporadic breast cancer subtypes have not been well characterized, and there is only a limited understanding of the epigenetic mechanisms affected in those particular breast cancer subtypes. The present study was undertaken to dissect the breast cancer methylome and deliver specific epigenotypes associated with particular breast cancer subtypes. METHODS: Using a microarray approach we analyzed DNA methylation in regulatory regions of 806 cancer related genes in 28 breast cancer paired samples. We subsequently performed substantial technical and biological validation by Pyrosequencing, investigating the top qualifying 19 CpG regions in independent cohorts encompassing 47 basal-like, 44 ERBB2+ overexpressing, 48 luminal A and 48 luminal B paired breast cancer/adjacent tissues. Using all-subset selection method, we identified the most subtype predictive methylation profiles in multivariable logistic regression analysis. RESULTS: The approach efficiently recognized 15 individual CpG loci differentially methylated in breast cancer tumor subtypes. We further identify novel subtype specific epigenotypes which clearly demonstrate the differences in the methylation profiles of basal-like and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)-overexpressing tumors. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidence that well defined DNA methylation profiles enables breast cancer subtype prediction and support the utilization of this biomarker for prognostication and therapeutic stratification of patients with breast cancer.. INTRODUCTION: Identification of gene expression based breast cancer subtypes is considered as a critical means of prognostication. Genetic mutations along with epigenetic alterations contribute to gene expression changes occurring in breast cancer. So far, these epigenetic contributions to sporadic breast cancer subtypes have not been well characterized, and there is only a limited understanding of the epigenetic mechanisms affected in those particular breast cancer subtypes. The present study was undertaken to dissect the breast cancer methylome and deliver specific epigenotypes associated with particular breast cancer subtypes. METHODS: Using a microarray approach we analyzed DNA methylation in regulatory regions of 806 cancer related genes in 28 breast cancer paired samples. We subsequently performed substantial technical and biological validation by Pyrosequencing, investigating the top qualifying 19 CpG regions in independent cohorts encompassing 47 basal-like, 44 ERBB2+ overexpressing, 48 luminal A and 48 luminal B paired breast cancer/adjacent tissues. Using all-subset selection method, we identified the most subtype predictive methylation profiles in multivariable logistic regression analysis. RESULTS: The approach efficiently recognized 15 individual CpG loci differentially methylated in breast cancer tumor subtypes. We further identify novel subtype specific epigenotypes which clearly demonstrate the differences in the methylation profiles of basal-like and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)-overexpressing tumors. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidence that well defined DNA methylation profiles enables breast cancer subtype prediction and support the utilization of this biomarker for prognostication and therapeutic stratification of patients with breast cancer.

Aberrant DNA methylation on CpG islands is one of the most consistent epigenetic changes in human cancers, and the process of methylation is catalyzed by the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b. Recent reports demonstrate that deregulation of miR-124a, one of the frequently methylated microRNAs in human cancers, is related to carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the frequencies of methylation of the three genomic loci encoding the miR-124a in primary breast cancers and to investigate their relationships with the clinicopathological characteristics of the tumors and with the expression levels of DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b. The methylation status of the three genomic loci encoding the miR-124a (miR-124a-1, miR-124a-2, and miR-124a-3) was analyzed in fresh-frozen tumor samples using methylation-specific PCR in a large series of invasive breast ductal carcinomas (n = 60). Results were correlated to several clinicopathological characteristics of the tumors and to the expression levels of DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b, determined by immunohistochemistry. Promoter hypermethylation of miR-124a-1, miR-124a-2, and miR-124a-3 was detected in 53.3, 70, and 36.7% of cases, respectively. Methylation of miR-124a-2 correlated to patients with age higher than 45 years (P = 0.008) and to postmenopausal patients (P = 0.03), whereas methylation of miR-124a-3 correlated significantly to tumor size >20 mm (P = 0.03). Interestingly, simultaneous methylation of the three genes encoding miR-124a correlated significantly with the presence of lymph node metastasis (P = 0.01) and high mitotic score (P = 0.03). No significant correlation was found between promoter hypermethylation of miR-124a and expression of hormone receptors or HER2/neu. With regard to DNMT expression, no correlation was found between DNMT1 or DNMT3a expression and promoter methylation of any tested microRNA. However, DNMT3b overexpression correlates significantly with the hypermethylation of miR-124a-3 (P = 0.03). Our data indicates that miR-124a-1, miR-124a-2, and miR-124a-3 genes are frequently methylated in breast cancer and play a role in tumor growth and aggressivity.. Aberrant DNA methylation on CpG islands is one of the most consistent epigenetic changes in human cancers, and the process of methylation is catalyzed by the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b. Recent reports demonstrate that deregulation of miR-124a, one of the frequently methylated microRNAs in human cancers, is related to carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the frequencies of methylation of the three genomic loci encoding the miR-124a in primary breast cancers and to investigate their relationships with the clinicopathological characteristics of the tumors and with the expression levels of DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b. The methylation status of the three genomic loci encoding the miR-124a (miR-124a-1, miR-124a-2, and miR-124a-3) was analyzed in fresh-frozen tumor samples using methylation-specific PCR in a large series of invasive breast ductal carcinomas (n = 60). Results were correlated to several clinicopathological characteristics of the tumors and to the expression levels of DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b, determined by immunohistochemistry. Promoter hypermethylation of miR-124a-1, miR-124a-2, and miR-124a-3 was detected in 53.3, 70, and 36.7% of cases, respectively. Methylation of miR-124a-2 correlated to patients with age higher than 45 years (P = 0.008) and to postmenopausal patients (P = 0.03), whereas methylation of miR-124a-3 correlated significantly to tumor size >20 mm (P = 0.03). Interestingly, simultaneous methylation of the three genes encoding miR-124a correlated significantly with the presence of lymph node metastasis (P = 0.01) and high mitotic score (P = 0.03). No significant correlation was found between promoter hypermethylation of miR-124a and expression of hormone receptors or HER2/neu. With regard to DNMT expression, no correlation was found between DNMT1 or DNMT3a expression and promoter methylation of any tested microRNA. However, DNMT3b overexpression correlates significantly with the hypermethylation of miR-124a-3 (P = 0.03). Our data indicates that miR-124a-1, miR-124a-2, and miR-124a-3 genes are frequently methylated in breast cancer and play a role in tumor growth and aggressivity.

BACKGROUND: We examined whether differences in tumor DNA methylation were associated with more aggressive hormone receptor-negative breast cancer in an ethnically diverse group of patients in the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago (BCCC) study and using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). RESULTS: DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples on 75 patients (21 White, 31 African-American, and 23 Hispanic) (training dataset) enrolled in the BCCC. Hormone receptor status was defined as negative if tumors were negative for both estrogen and progesterone (ER/PR) receptors (N = 22/75). DNA methylation was analyzed at 1505 CpG sites within 807 gene promoters using the Illumina GoldenGate assay. Differential DNA methylation as a predictor of hormone receptor status was tested while controlling for false discovery rate and assigned to the gene closest to the respective CpG site. Next, those genes that predicted ER/PR status were validated using TCGA data with respect to DNA methylation (validation dataset), and correlations between CpG methylation and gene expression were examined. In the training dataset, 5.7 % of promoter mean methylation values (46/807) were associated with receptor status at P < 0.05; for 88 % of these (38/46), hypermethylation was associated with receptor-positive disease. Hypermethylation for FZD9, MME, BCAP31, HDAC9, PAX6, SCGB3A1, PDGFRA, IGFBP3, and PTGS2 genes most strongly predicted receptor-positive disease. Twenty-one of 24 predictor genes from the training dataset were confirmed in the validation dataset. The level of DNA methylation at 19 out 22 genes, for which gene expression data were available, was associated with gene activity. CONCLUSIONS: Higher levels of promoter methylation strongly correlate with hormone receptor positive status of breast tumors. For most of the genes identified in our training dataset as ER/PR receptor status predictors, DNA methylation correlated with stable gene expression level. The predictors performed well when evaluated on independent set of samples, with different racioethnic distribution, thus providing evidence that this set of DNA methylation biomarkers will likely generalize to prospective patient samples.. BACKGROUND: We examined whether differences in tumor DNA methylation were associated with more aggressive hormone receptor-negative breast cancer in an ethnically diverse group of patients in the Breast Cancer Care in Chicago (BCCC) study and using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). RESULTS: DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples on 75 patients (21 White, 31 African-American, and 23 Hispanic) (training dataset) enrolled in the BCCC. Hormone receptor status was defined as negative if tumors were negative for both estrogen and progesterone (ER/PR) receptors (N = 22/75). DNA methylation was analyzed at 1505 CpG sites within 807 gene promoters using the Illumina GoldenGate assay. Differential DNA methylation as a predictor of hormone receptor status was tested while controlling for false discovery rate and assigned to the gene closest to the respective CpG site. Next, those genes that predicted ER/PR status were validated using TCGA data with respect to DNA methylation (validation dataset), and correlations between CpG methylation and gene expression were examined. In the training dataset, 5.7 % of promoter mean methylation values (46/807) were associated with receptor status at P < 0.05; for 88 % of these (38/46), hypermethylation was associated with receptor-positive disease. Hypermethylation for FZD9, MME, BCAP31, HDAC9, PAX6, SCGB3A1, PDGFRA, IGFBP3, and PTGS2 genes most strongly predicted receptor-positive disease. Twenty-one of 24 predictor genes from the training dataset were confirmed in the validation dataset. The level of DNA methylation at 19 out 22 genes, for which gene expression data were available, was associated with gene activity. CONCLUSIONS: Higher levels of promoter methylation strongly correlate with hormone receptor positive status of breast tumors. For most of the genes identified in our training dataset as ER/PR receptor status predictors, DNA methylation correlated with stable gene expression level. The predictors performed well when evaluated on independent set of samples, with different racioethnic distribution, thus providing evidence that this set of DNA methylation biomarkers will likely generalize to prospective patient samples.

Blood-based biomarkers such as circulating tumor cells (CTCs) provide dynamic real-time assessment of molecular tumor characteristics beyond the primary tumor. The aim of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of a size-based microfilter to assess multigene methylation analysis of enriched CTCs in a prospective proof-of principle study. We examined the quantitative methylation status of nine genes (AKR1B1, BMP6, CST6, HOXB4, HIST1H3C, ITIH5, NEUROD1, RASSF1, SOX17) in enriched CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients. Feasibility and clinical performance testing were assessed in a test set consisting of 37 patients and 25 healthy controls. With established cut-off values from the healthy control group, methylation of enriched CTCs was detected in at least one gene in 18/37 patients (48.6%), while 97.8% of all control samples were unmethylated. Patients with CTCs unmethylated for CST6, ITIH5, or RASSF1 showed significantly longer PFS compared to patients with corresponding enriched methylated CTCs. This proof-of-principle study shows the feasibility of a size-based microfilter to enrich and analyze multigene methylation profile of CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients. For the first time, we report that multigene methylation analysis of enriched CTCs provides prognostic information in metastatic breast cancer patients.. Blood-based biomarkers such as circulating tumor cells (CTCs) provide dynamic real-time assessment of molecular tumor characteristics beyond the primary tumor. The aim of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of a size-based microfilter to assess multigene methylation analysis of enriched CTCs in a prospective proof-of principle study. We examined the quantitative methylation status of nine genes (AKR1B1, BMP6, CST6, HOXB4, HIST1H3C, ITIH5, NEUROD1, RASSF1, SOX17) in enriched CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients. Feasibility and clinical performance testing were assessed in a test set consisting of 37 patients and 25 healthy controls. With established cut-off values from the healthy control group, methylation of enriched CTCs was detected in at least one gene in 18/37 patients (48.6%), while 97.8% of all control samples were unmethylated. Patients with CTCs unmethylated for CST6, ITIH5, or RASSF1 showed significantly longer PFS compared to patients with corresponding enriched methylated CTCs. This proof-of-principle study shows the feasibility of a size-based microfilter to enrich and analyze multigene methylation profile of CTCs from metastatic breast cancer patients. For the first time, we report that multigene methylation analysis of enriched CTCs provides prognostic information in metastatic breast cancer patients.

Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands is generally recognized epigenetic mechanism responsible for gene silencing in cancer. However, molecular details on how this epigenetic mark triggers the process of gene downregulation are still elusive. Here, we used deep bisulfite sequencing and qPCR analysis to investigate the pattern of CpG methylation of ALDH1L1 promoter region and its association with the gene expression level in 16 paired breast cancer (BC) samples of different clinical stages. Expression of ALDH1L1 gene was suppressed in all examined BC samples up to 200-fold, and average hypermethylation level of the promoter region correlated positively with ALDH1L1 downregulation. We determined the role of every individual CpG site within the ALDH1L1 promoter, including upstream untranscribed region, first untranslated exon, and the start of the first intron, in aberrant gene expression by correlation analysis. The search revealed CpG sites which methylation has the highest impact on intensity of gene transcription. The majority of such CpG sites are located in a compact region in the first intron of the ALDH1L1 gene. These results assist in unraveling of dynamic nature of CpG promoter hypermethylation as well as demonstrate the efficiency of deep bisulfite sequencing in search for novel epigenetic markers in cancer.. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands is generally recognized epigenetic mechanism responsible for gene silencing in cancer. However, molecular details on how this epigenetic mark triggers the process of gene downregulation are still elusive. Here, we used deep bisulfite sequencing and qPCR analysis to investigate the pattern of CpG methylation of ALDH1L1 promoter region and its association with the gene expression level in 16 paired breast cancer (BC) samples of different clinical stages. Expression of ALDH1L1 gene was suppressed in all examined BC samples up to 200-fold, and average hypermethylation level of the promoter region correlated positively with ALDH1L1 downregulation. We determined the role of every individual CpG site within the ALDH1L1 promoter, including upstream untranscribed region, first untranslated exon, and the start of the first intron, in aberrant gene expression by correlation analysis. The search revealed CpG sites which methylation has the highest impact on intensity of gene transcription. The majority of such CpG sites are located in a compact region in the first intron of the ALDH1L1 gene. These results assist in unraveling of dynamic nature of CpG promoter hypermethylation as well as demonstrate the efficiency of deep bisulfite sequencing in search for novel epigenetic markers in cancer.

This study determines the role of laminin-1 in promoting metastatic colonization during breast cancer. For this purpose, human mammary epithelial cell lines representing normal (MCF-10A), adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), and malignant carcinoma (MDA-MB-231) were propagated in 3-dimensional cultures composed of laminin-1, collagen I, or mixtures of the two, and analyzed by Western blot, immunocytochemistry, semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, and methylation-specific PCR. Here we demonstrate that laminin-1 decreases methylation of the E-cadherin promoter, resulting in increased mRNA and protein expression for malignant mammary epithelial cells. This decreased methylation is associated with dramatic changes in the cellular and structural morphology as well as a 70-fold decrease in DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and a 6-fold decrease in cadherin 11 protein expression. To control for specificity of laminin-1 interactions, cells were also cultured on 2-dimensional plastic substrata and collagen I hydrogels for analysis, and the MCF-10A and MCF-7 were used as nonmalignant controls. Using a 3-dimensional model, we present evidence that laminin-1 is capable of inducing epigenetic change by inhibiting expression of DNMT1 and preventing methylation of the E-cadherin promoter, resulting in E-cadherin expression and the formation of cell-cell bonds in malignant carcinoma.. This study determines the role of laminin-1 in promoting metastatic colonization during breast cancer. For this purpose, human mammary epithelial cell lines representing normal (MCF-10A), adenocarcinoma (MCF-7), and malignant carcinoma (MDA-MB-231) were propagated in 3-dimensional cultures composed of laminin-1, collagen I, or mixtures of the two, and analyzed by Western blot, immunocytochemistry, semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, and methylation-specific PCR. Here we demonstrate that laminin-1 decreases methylation of the E-cadherin promoter, resulting in increased mRNA and protein expression for malignant mammary epithelial cells. This decreased methylation is associated with dramatic changes in the cellular and structural morphology as well as a 70-fold decrease in DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and a 6-fold decrease in cadherin 11 protein expression. To control for specificity of laminin-1 interactions, cells were also cultured on 2-dimensional plastic substrata and collagen I hydrogels for analysis, and the MCF-10A and MCF-7 were used as nonmalignant controls. Using a 3-dimensional model, we present evidence that laminin-1 is capable of inducing epigenetic change by inhibiting expression of DNMT1 and preventing methylation of the E-cadherin promoter, resulting in E-cadherin expression and the formation of cell-cell bonds in malignant carcinoma.

. 
AIM: To identify DNA methylation biomarkers in peripheral blood samples from triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. MATERIALS & METHODS: We conducted an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS): the most promising markers were identified in 233 TNBC case-control pairs (discovery set) and subsequently validated in an independent validation set (57 TNBC patients and 124 controls). RESULTS: cg06588802 (LINC00299/ID2) showed a higher methylation in TNBC patients compared with controls (discovery set: 3% increase, p-value = 0.0009; validation set: 2% increase, p-value = 0.01). Consistent results at four neighboring methylation probes and the strong negative correlation (rho = -0.93) with LINC00299 expression add plausibility to this result. CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation of LINC00299 in peripheral blood may constitute a useful circulating biomarker for TNBC.. AIM: To identify DNA methylation biomarkers in peripheral blood samples from triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. MATERIALS & METHODS: We conducted an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS): the most promising markers were identified in 233 TNBC case-control pairs (discovery set) and subsequently validated in an independent validation set (57 TNBC patients and 124 controls). RESULTS: cg06588802 (LINC00299/ID2) showed a higher methylation in TNBC patients compared with controls (discovery set: 3% increase, p-value = 0.0009; validation set: 2% increase, p-value = 0.01). Consistent results at four neighboring methylation probes and the strong negative correlation (rho = -0.93) with LINC00299 expression add plausibility to this result. CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation of LINC00299 in peripheral blood may constitute a useful circulating biomarker for TNBC.

The pattern of altered gene expression due to epigenetic change is of major importance in malignancies. Aberrant DNA methylation is one of the many potential causes for this and is considered to be an early event in the etiology of breast carcinogenesis. The present study assessed the methylation status of three genes relevant in breast cancer (BC): The breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1), 17 beta hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase type 1 (HSD17B1) and type 2 (HSD17B2). Restriction enzyme based Methylation specific PCR (REMS PCR) was carried out in 104 tumor samples from sporadic BC patients and 48 samples of adjacent normal breast tissue. The percentage of tumor samples showing BRCA1, HSD17B1 and HSD17B2 methylation was 20.4%, 83.3% and 31.3%, respectively. Methylation was higher in tumors when compared to adjacent normal breast tissue samples. This suggests that methylation of these three genes plays an important role in BC etiology. Methylation is responsible for gene silencing and since BRCA1 and HSD17B2 were not found to be methylated in the same tissue samples, this suggests that the etiology of > 50% of the tumors could be accounted for by the independent epigenetic silencing of these two genes. BRCA1 and HSD17B2 genes may increase the risk of developing BC via enhanced estradiol activity. It is for the first time that the role of HSD17B gene methylation in BC pathophysiology is being proposed.. The pattern of altered gene expression due to epigenetic change is of major importance in malignancies. Aberrant DNA methylation is one of the many potential causes for this and is considered to be an early event in the etiology of breast carcinogenesis. The present study assessed the methylation status of three genes relevant in breast cancer (BC): The breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1), 17 beta hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase type 1 (HSD17B1) and type 2 (HSD17B2). Restriction enzyme based Methylation specific PCR (REMS PCR) was carried out in 104 tumor samples from sporadic BC patients and 48 samples of adjacent normal breast tissue. The percentage of tumor samples showing BRCA1, HSD17B1 and HSD17B2 methylation was 20.4%, 83.3% and 31.3%, respectively. Methylation was higher in tumors when compared to adjacent normal breast tissue samples. This suggests that methylation of these three genes plays an important role in BC etiology. Methylation is responsible for gene silencing and since BRCA1 and HSD17B2 were not found to be methylated in the same tissue samples, this suggests that the etiology of > 50% of the tumors could be accounted for by the independent epigenetic silencing of these two genes. BRCA1 and HSD17B2 genes may increase the risk of developing BC via enhanced estradiol activity. It is for the first time that the role of HSD17B gene methylation in BC pathophysiology is being proposed.

The superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities in normal and tumor breast tissues from 14 human females were determined by the epinephrine autoxidation assay. SOD levels showed a marked interindividual variability in normal and malignant cells. However, each donor had a higher SOD activity in cancer than in normal tissue samples. In three cases in which Mn- and CuZnSOD activities were determined, it was found that tumoral increases in SOD were due to increases in both enzymatic forms. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume a similar situation for all cases in our series. The level of DNA methylation in the SOD-1 gene was assessed in the first four donors. The four cases exhibited full methylation of SOD-1 genes corresponding to normal as well as to cancer cells. It is concluded that the variability in CuZnSOD activities is not related with the state of methylation of the SOD-1 gene. MspI restriction fragment polymorphisms between DNA samples from normal and malignant cells were detected in the four DNA donors. This phenomenon may be due to point mutations changing the frequency of MspI sites or to methylation of the external C in CCGG sequences.. The superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities in normal and tumor breast tissues from 14 human females were determined by the epinephrine autoxidation assay. SOD levels showed a marked interindividual variability in normal and malignant cells. However, each donor had a higher SOD activity in cancer than in normal tissue samples. In three cases in which Mn- and CuZnSOD activities were determined, it was found that tumoral increases in SOD were due to increases in both enzymatic forms. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume a similar situation for all cases in our series. The level of DNA methylation in the SOD-1 gene was assessed in the first four donors. The four cases exhibited full methylation of SOD-1 genes corresponding to normal as well as to cancer cells. It is concluded that the variability in CuZnSOD activities is not related with the state of methylation of the SOD-1 gene. MspI restriction fragment polymorphisms between DNA samples from normal and malignant cells were detected in the four DNA donors. This phenomenon may be due to point mutations changing the frequency of MspI sites or to methylation of the external C in CCGG sequences.

Human Cripto-1 (CR-1) plays an important role in regulating embryonic development while also regulating various stages of tumor progression. However, mechanisms that regulate CR-1 expression during embryogenesis and tumorigenesis are still not well defined. In the present study, we investigated the effects of two nuclear receptors, liver receptor homolog (LRH)-1 and germ cell nuclear factor receptor (GCNF) and epigenetic modifications on CR-1 gene expression in NTERA-2 human embryonal carcinoma cells and in breast cancer cells. CR-1 expression in NTERA-2 cells was positively regulated by LRH-1 through direct binding to a DR0 element within the CR-1 promoter, while GCNF strongly suppressed CR-1 expression in these cells. In addition, the CR-1 promoter was unmethylated in NTERA-2 cells, while T47D, ZR75-1, and MCF7 breast cancer cells showed high levels of CR-1 promoter methylation and low CR-1 mRNA and protein expression. Treatment of breast cancer cells with a demethylating agent and histone deacetylase inhibitors reduced methylation of the CR-1 promoter and reactivated CR-1 mRNA and protein expression in these cells, promoting migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. Analysis of a breast cancer tissue array revealed that CR-1 was highly expressed in the majority of human breast tumors, suggesting that CR-1 expression in breast cancer cell lines might not be representative of in vivo expression. Collectively, these findings offer some insight into the transcriptional regulation of CR-1 gene expression and its critical role in the pathogenesis of human cancer.. Human Cripto-1 (CR-1) plays an important role in regulating embryonic development while also regulating various stages of tumor progression. However, mechanisms that regulate CR-1 expression during embryogenesis and tumorigenesis are still not well defined. In the present study, we investigated the effects of two nuclear receptors, liver receptor homolog (LRH)-1 and germ cell nuclear factor receptor (GCNF) and epigenetic modifications on CR-1 gene expression in NTERA-2 human embryonal carcinoma cells and in breast cancer cells. CR-1 expression in NTERA-2 cells was positively regulated by LRH-1 through direct binding to a DR0 element within the CR-1 promoter, while GCNF strongly suppressed CR-1 expression in these cells. In addition, the CR-1 promoter was unmethylated in NTERA-2 cells, while T47D, ZR75-1, and MCF7 breast cancer cells showed high levels of CR-1 promoter methylation and low CR-1 mRNA and protein expression. Treatment of breast cancer cells with a demethylating agent and histone deacetylase inhibitors reduced methylation of the CR-1 promoter and reactivated CR-1 mRNA and protein expression in these cells, promoting migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. Analysis of a breast cancer tissue array revealed that CR-1 was highly expressed in the majority of human breast tumors, suggesting that CR-1 expression in breast cancer cell lines might not be representative of in vivo expression. Collectively, these findings offer some insight into the transcriptional regulation of CR-1 gene expression and its critical role in the pathogenesis of human cancer.

The role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast and ovarian cancers remains elusive. Direct involvement of BRCA1 in the development of breast and ovarian cancer is suggested by the finding that the BRCA1 promoter region CpG island is methylated in a proportion of breast and ovarian cancers. The aim of this study was to compare the incidence of BRCA1 promoter region methylation in tumours in which loss of BRCA1 has been shown to play a role in pathogenesis (breast and ovarian carcinomas) with the incidence in tumours in which BRCA1 is unlikely to play a role in pathogenesis. Promoter region hypermethylation was significantly more common (P < 0.008) in breast and ovarian cancer (6/38 tumours methylated) than in colon cancer (0/35 tumours methylated) or in leukaemias (0/19 samples methylated). The restriction of BRCA1 promoter region hypermethylation to breast and ovarian cancer is consistent with a pathogenetic role of BRCA1 promoter methylation in these tumours. We suggest that the rarity of observed BRCA1 mutations in sporadic breast and ovarian cancer is due to the greater likelihood of BRCA1 inactivation by non-mutational mechanisms such as methylation.. The role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast and ovarian cancers remains elusive. Direct involvement of BRCA1 in the development of breast and ovarian cancer is suggested by the finding that the BRCA1 promoter region CpG island is methylated in a proportion of breast and ovarian cancers. The aim of this study was to compare the incidence of BRCA1 promoter region methylation in tumours in which loss of BRCA1 has been shown to play a role in pathogenesis (breast and ovarian carcinomas) with the incidence in tumours in which BRCA1 is unlikely to play a role in pathogenesis. Promoter region hypermethylation was significantly more common (P < 0.008) in breast and ovarian cancer (6/38 tumours methylated) than in colon cancer (0/35 tumours methylated) or in leukaemias (0/19 samples methylated). The restriction of BRCA1 promoter region hypermethylation to breast and ovarian cancer is consistent with a pathogenetic role of BRCA1 promoter methylation in these tumours. We suggest that the rarity of observed BRCA1 mutations in sporadic breast and ovarian cancer is due to the greater likelihood of BRCA1 inactivation by non-mutational mechanisms such as methylation.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) is a transcriptional regulator, which mediates estrogen-dependent breast development, as well as breast tumorigenesis. The influence of epigenetic regulation of ER-alpha on adolescent breast composition has not been previously studied and could serve as a marker of pubertal health and susceptibility to breast cancer. We investigated the association between ER-alpha DNA methylation in leukocytes and breast composition in adolescent Chilean girls enrolled in the Growth and Obesity Cohort Study (GOCS) in Santiago, Chile. Breast composition (total breast volume (BV; cm(3)), fibroglandular volume (FGV; cm(3)), and percent fibroglandular volume (%FGV)) was measured at breast Tanner stage 4 (B4). ER-alpha promoter DNA methylation was assessed by pyrosequencing in blood samples collected at breast Tanner stages 2 (B2; n = 256) and B4 (n = 338). RESULTS: After adjusting for fat percentage at breast density measurement, ER-alpha methylation at B2, and cellular heterogeneity, we observed an inverse association between B4 average ER-alpha DNA methylation and BV and FGV. Geometric mean BV was 15% lower (95% CI: - 28%, - 1%) among girls in the highest quartile of B4 ER-alpha methylation (6.96-23.60%) relative to the lowest (0.78-3.37%). Similarly, FGV was 19% lower (95% CI: - 33%, - 2%) among girls in the highest quartile of B4 ER-alpha methylation relative to the lowest. The association between ER-alpha methylation and breast composition was not significantly modified by body fat percentage and was not influenced by pubertal timing. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the methylation profile of ER-alpha may modulate adolescent response to estrogen and breast composition, which may influence breast cancer risk in adulthood.. BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) is a transcriptional regulator, which mediates estrogen-dependent breast development, as well as breast tumorigenesis. The influence of epigenetic regulation of ER-alpha on adolescent breast composition has not been previously studied and could serve as a marker of pubertal health and susceptibility to breast cancer. We investigated the association between ER-alpha DNA methylation in leukocytes and breast composition in adolescent Chilean girls enrolled in the Growth and Obesity Cohort Study (GOCS) in Santiago, Chile. Breast composition (total breast volume (BV; cm(3)), fibroglandular volume (FGV; cm(3)), and percent fibroglandular volume (%FGV)) was measured at breast Tanner stage 4 (B4). ER-alpha promoter DNA methylation was assessed by pyrosequencing in blood samples collected at breast Tanner stages 2 (B2; n = 256) and B4 (n = 338). RESULTS: After adjusting for fat percentage at breast density measurement, ER-alpha methylation at B2, and cellular heterogeneity, we observed an inverse association between B4 average ER-alpha DNA methylation and BV and FGV. Geometric mean BV was 15% lower (95% CI: - 28%, - 1%) among girls in the highest quartile of B4 ER-alpha methylation (6.96-23.60%) relative to the lowest (0.78-3.37%). Similarly, FGV was 19% lower (95% CI: - 33%, - 2%) among girls in the highest quartile of B4 ER-alpha methylation relative to the lowest. The association between ER-alpha methylation and breast composition was not significantly modified by body fat percentage and was not influenced by pubertal timing. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the methylation profile of ER-alpha may modulate adolescent response to estrogen and breast composition, which may influence breast cancer risk in adulthood.

Cellular identity and differentiation are determined by epigenetic programs. The characteristics of these programs in normal human mammary epithelium and their similarity to those in stem cells are unknown. To begin investigating these issues, we analyzed the DNA methylation and gene expression profiles of distinct subpopulations of mammary epithelial cells by using MSDK (methylation-specific digital karyotyping) and SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression). We identified discrete cell-type and differentiation state-specific DNA methylation and gene expression patterns that were maintained in a subset of breast carcinomas and correlated with clinically relevant tumor subtypes. CD44+ cells were the most hypomethylated and highly expressed several transcription factors with known stem cell function including HOXA10 and TCF3. Many of these genes were also hypomethylated in BMP4-treated compared with undifferentiated human embryonic stem (ES) cells that we analyzed by MSDK for comparison. Further highlighting the similarity of epigenetic programs of embryonic and mammary epithelial cells, genes highly expressed in CD44+ relative to more differentiated CD24+ cells were significantly enriched for Suz12 targets in ES cells. The expression of FOXC1, one of the transcription factors hypomethylated and highly expressed in CD44+ cells, induced a progenitor-like phenotype in differentiated mammary epithelial cells. These data suggest that epigenetically controlled transcription factors play a key role in regulating mammary epithelial cell phenotypes and imply similarities among epigenetic programs that define progenitor cell characteristics.. Cellular identity and differentiation are determined by epigenetic programs. The characteristics of these programs in normal human mammary epithelium and their similarity to those in stem cells are unknown. To begin investigating these issues, we analyzed the DNA methylation and gene expression profiles of distinct subpopulations of mammary epithelial cells by using MSDK (methylation-specific digital karyotyping) and SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression). We identified discrete cell-type and differentiation state-specific DNA methylation and gene expression patterns that were maintained in a subset of breast carcinomas and correlated with clinically relevant tumor subtypes. CD44+ cells were the most hypomethylated and highly expressed several transcription factors with known stem cell function including HOXA10 and TCF3. Many of these genes were also hypomethylated in BMP4-treated compared with undifferentiated human embryonic stem (ES) cells that we analyzed by MSDK for comparison. Further highlighting the similarity of epigenetic programs of embryonic and mammary epithelial cells, genes highly expressed in CD44+ relative to more differentiated CD24+ cells were significantly enriched for Suz12 targets in ES cells. The expression of FOXC1, one of the transcription factors hypomethylated and highly expressed in CD44+ cells, induced a progenitor-like phenotype in differentiated mammary epithelial cells. These data suggest that epigenetically controlled transcription factors play a key role in regulating mammary epithelial cell phenotypes and imply similarities among epigenetic programs that define progenitor cell characteristics.

To evaluate the role of constitutive epigenetic changes in normal body cells of BRCA1/BRCA2-mutation negative patients, we have developed a deep bisulfite sequencing assay targeting the promoter regions of 8 tumor suppressor (TS) genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C, ATM, PTEN, TP53, MLH1, RB1) and the estrogene receptor gene (ESR1), which plays a role in tumor progression. We analyzed blood samples of two breast cancer (BC) cohorts with early onset (EO) and high risk (HR) for a heterozygous mutation, respectively, along with age-matched controls. Methylation analysis of up to 50,000 individual DNA molecules per gene and sample allowed quantification of epimutations (alleles with >50% methylated CpGs), which are associated with epigenetic silencing. Compared to ESR1, which is representative for an average promoter, TS genes were characterized by a very low (< 1%) average methylation level and a very low mean epimutation rate (EMR; < 0.0001% to 0.1%). With exception of BRCA1, which showed an increased EMR in BC (0.31% vs. 0.06%), there was no significant difference between patients and controls. One of 36 HR BC patients exhibited a dramatically increased EMR (14.7%) in BRCA1, consistent with a disease-causing epimutation. Approximately one third (15 of 44) EO BC patients exhibited increased rates of single CpG methylation errors in multiple TS genes. Both EO and HR BC patients exhibited global underexpression of blood TS genes. We propose that epigenetic abnormalities in normal body cells are indicative of disturbed mechanisms for maintaining low methylation and appropriate expression levels and may be associated with an increased BC risk.. To evaluate the role of constitutive epigenetic changes in normal body cells of BRCA1/BRCA2-mutation negative patients, we have developed a deep bisulfite sequencing assay targeting the promoter regions of 8 tumor suppressor (TS) genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C, ATM, PTEN, TP53, MLH1, RB1) and the estrogene receptor gene (ESR1), which plays a role in tumor progression. We analyzed blood samples of two breast cancer (BC) cohorts with early onset (EO) and high risk (HR) for a heterozygous mutation, respectively, along with age-matched controls. Methylation analysis of up to 50,000 individual DNA molecules per gene and sample allowed quantification of epimutations (alleles with >50% methylated CpGs), which are associated with epigenetic silencing. Compared to ESR1, which is representative for an average promoter, TS genes were characterized by a very low (< 1%) average methylation level and a very low mean epimutation rate (EMR; < 0.0001% to 0.1%). With exception of BRCA1, which showed an increased EMR in BC (0.31% vs. 0.06%), there was no significant difference between patients and controls. One of 36 HR BC patients exhibited a dramatically increased EMR (14.7%) in BRCA1, consistent with a disease-causing epimutation. Approximately one third (15 of 44) EO BC patients exhibited increased rates of single CpG methylation errors in multiple TS genes. Both EO and HR BC patients exhibited global underexpression of blood TS genes. We propose that epigenetic abnormalities in normal body cells are indicative of disturbed mechanisms for maintaining low methylation and appropriate expression levels and may be associated with an increased BC risk.

BACKGROUND: Environmental and genetic factors play an important role in the etiology of breast cancer. Several small blood-based DNA methylation studies have reported risk associations with methylation at individual CpGs and average methylation levels; however, these findings require validation in larger prospective cohort studies. To investigate the role of blood DNA methylation on breast cancer risk, we conducted a meta-analysis of four prospective cohort studies, including a total of 1663 incident cases and 1885 controls, the largest study of blood DNA methylation and breast cancer risk to date. METHODS: We assessed associations with methylation at 365,145 CpGs present in the HumanMethylation450 (HM450K) Beadchip, after excluding CpGs that did not pass quality controls in all studies. Each of the four cohorts estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the association between each individual CpG and breast cancer risk. In addition, each study assessed the association between average methylation measures and breast cancer risk, adjusted and unadjusted for cell-type composition. Study-specific ORs were combined using fixed-effect meta-analysis with inverse variance weights. Stratified analyses were conducted by age at diagnosis (< 50, >/= 50), estrogen receptor (ER) status (+/-), and time since blood collection (< 5, 5-10, > 10 years). The false discovery rate (q value) was used to account for multiple testing. RESULTS: The average age at blood draw ranged from 52.2 to 62.2 years across the four cohorts. Median follow-up time ranged from 6.6 to 8.4 years. The methylation measured at individual CpGs was not associated with breast cancer risk (q value > 0.59). In addition, higher average methylation level was not associated with risk of breast cancer (OR = 0.94, 95% CI = 0.85, 1.05; P = 0.26; P for study heterogeneity = 0.86). We found no evidence of modification of this association by age at diagnosis (P = 0.17), ER status (P = 0.88), time since blood collection (P = 0.98), or CpG location (P = 0.98). CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that DNA methylation measured in the blood prior to breast cancer diagnosis in predominantly postmenopausal women is unlikely to be associated with substantial breast cancer risk on the HM450K array. Larger studies or with greater methylation coverage are needed to determine if associations exist between blood DNA methylation and breast cancer risk.. BACKGROUND: Environmental and genetic factors play an important role in the etiology of breast cancer. Several small blood-based DNA methylation studies have reported risk associations with methylation at individual CpGs and average methylation levels; however, these findings require validation in larger prospective cohort studies. To investigate the role of blood DNA methylation on breast cancer risk, we conducted a meta-analysis of four prospective cohort studies, including a total of 1663 incident cases and 1885 controls, the largest study of blood DNA methylation and breast cancer risk to date. METHODS: We assessed associations with methylation at 365,145 CpGs present in the HumanMethylation450 (HM450K) Beadchip, after excluding CpGs that did not pass quality controls in all studies. Each of the four cohorts estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the association between each individual CpG and breast cancer risk. In addition, each study assessed the association between average methylation measures and breast cancer risk, adjusted and unadjusted for cell-type composition. Study-specific ORs were combined using fixed-effect meta-analysis with inverse variance weights. Stratified analyses were conducted by age at diagnosis (< 50, >/= 50), estrogen receptor (ER) status (+/-), and time since blood collection (< 5, 5-10, > 10 years). The false discovery rate (q value) was used to account for multiple testing. RESULTS: The average age at blood draw ranged from 52.2 to 62.2 years across the four cohorts. Median follow-up time ranged from 6.6 to 8.4 years. The methylation measured at individual CpGs was not associated with breast cancer risk (q value > 0.59). In addition, higher average methylation level was not associated with risk of breast cancer (OR = 0.94, 95% CI = 0.85, 1.05; P = 0.26; P for study heterogeneity = 0.86). We found no evidence of modification of this association by age at diagnosis (P = 0.17), ER status (P = 0.88), time since blood collection (P = 0.98), or CpG location (P = 0.98). CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that DNA methylation measured in the blood prior to breast cancer diagnosis in predominantly postmenopausal women is unlikely to be associated with substantial breast cancer risk on the HM450K array. Larger studies or with greater methylation coverage are needed to determine if associations exist between blood DNA methylation and breast cancer risk.

Acquired drug resistance represents a frequent obstacle which hampers efficient chemotherapy of cancers. The contribution of aberrant DNA methylation to the development of drug resistant tumor cells has gained increasing attention over the past decades. Hence, the objective of the presented study was to characterize DNA methylation changes which arise from treatment of tumor cells with the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin. DNA methylation levels from CpG islands (CGIs) linked to twenty-eight genes, whose expression levels had previously been shown to contribute to resistance against DNA double strand break inducing drugs or tumor progression in different cancer types were analyzed. High-definition DNA methylation profiles which consisted of methylation levels from 800 CpG sites mapping to CGIs around the transcription start sites of the selected genes were determined. In order to investigate the influence of CGI methylation on the expression of associated genes, their mRNA levels were investigated via qRT-PCR. It was shown that the employed method is suitable for providing highly accurate methylation profiles, comparable to those obtained via clone sequencing, the gold standard for high-definition DNA methylation studies. In breast carcinoma cells with acquired resistance against the double strand break inducing drug doxorubicin, changes in methylation of specific cytosines from CGIs linked to thirteen genes were detected. Moreover, similarities between methylation profiles obtained from breast and ovarian carcinoma cell lines with acquired doxorubicin resistance were found. The expression levels of a subset of analyzed genes were shown to be linked to the methylation levels of the analyzed CGIs. Our results provide detailed DNA methylation information from two separate model systems for acquired doxorubicin resistance and suggest the occurrence of similar methylation changes in both systems upon exposure to the drug.. Acquired drug resistance represents a frequent obstacle which hampers efficient chemotherapy of cancers. The contribution of aberrant DNA methylation to the development of drug resistant tumor cells has gained increasing attention over the past decades. Hence, the objective of the presented study was to characterize DNA methylation changes which arise from treatment of tumor cells with the chemotherapeutic drug doxorubicin. DNA methylation levels from CpG islands (CGIs) linked to twenty-eight genes, whose expression levels had previously been shown to contribute to resistance against DNA double strand break inducing drugs or tumor progression in different cancer types were analyzed. High-definition DNA methylation profiles which consisted of methylation levels from 800 CpG sites mapping to CGIs around the transcription start sites of the selected genes were determined. In order to investigate the influence of CGI methylation on the expression of associated genes, their mRNA levels were investigated via qRT-PCR. It was shown that the employed method is suitable for providing highly accurate methylation profiles, comparable to those obtained via clone sequencing, the gold standard for high-definition DNA methylation studies. In breast carcinoma cells with acquired resistance against the double strand break inducing drug doxorubicin, changes in methylation of specific cytosines from CGIs linked to thirteen genes were detected. Moreover, similarities between methylation profiles obtained from breast and ovarian carcinoma cell lines with acquired doxorubicin resistance were found. The expression levels of a subset of analyzed genes were shown to be linked to the methylation levels of the analyzed CGIs. Our results provide detailed DNA methylation information from two separate model systems for acquired doxorubicin resistance and suggest the occurrence of similar methylation changes in both systems upon exposure to the drug.

Although soy phytoestrogens have been postulated to exert a protective effect against breast cancer, the attendant mechanisms, in particular epigenetics underpinnings, have remained elusive. We investigated the putative effects on DNA methylation by two naturally occurring isoflavones, genistein and daidzein, in a study of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 oncosuppressor genes in breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB 231, and MCF10a). A demethylant agent, the 5-azacytidine, and a methylant, the budesonide, were used as treatment controls. DNA methylation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 was investigated with methylated DNA immunoprecipitation coupled with PCR. In parallel, protein expression was determined by Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and confocal microscopy. Our results suggest that treatment with 18.5 muM Genistein or 78.5 muM Daidzein might reverse DNA hypermethylation and restore the expression of the oncosuppressor genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. 5-Azacitydine also enhanced the reexpression of these genes while budesonide had an opposite effect. To the best of our knowledge, these observations, while requiring replication, provide new evidence on potential epigenetic mechanisms by which genistein and daidzein might contribute to regulation of the BRCA1 and BRCA2. Future studies are warranted on whether the demethylating effect of genistein and daidzein is global or focused on select candidate genes.. Although soy phytoestrogens have been postulated to exert a protective effect against breast cancer, the attendant mechanisms, in particular epigenetics underpinnings, have remained elusive. We investigated the putative effects on DNA methylation by two naturally occurring isoflavones, genistein and daidzein, in a study of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 oncosuppressor genes in breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB 231, and MCF10a). A demethylant agent, the 5-azacytidine, and a methylant, the budesonide, were used as treatment controls. DNA methylation of BRCA1 and BRCA2 was investigated with methylated DNA immunoprecipitation coupled with PCR. In parallel, protein expression was determined by Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and confocal microscopy. Our results suggest that treatment with 18.5 muM Genistein or 78.5 muM Daidzein might reverse DNA hypermethylation and restore the expression of the oncosuppressor genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. 5-Azacitydine also enhanced the reexpression of these genes while budesonide had an opposite effect. To the best of our knowledge, these observations, while requiring replication, provide new evidence on potential epigenetic mechanisms by which genistein and daidzein might contribute to regulation of the BRCA1 and BRCA2. Future studies are warranted on whether the demethylating effect of genistein and daidzein is global or focused on select candidate genes.

OBJECTIVE: Epigenetics, particularly DNA methylation, has recently been shown to be important in breast cancer initiation. We investigated the clinical and prognostic importance of whole blood breast cancer early onset gene 1 (BRCA1) DNA methylation in sporadic breast cancer. METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood cells (PBCs) of 902 breast cancer patients at diagnosis, with no BRCA1 mutation, and 990 control women. DNA methylation was measured by quantitative analysis of methylated alleles (QAMA) to estimate the extent of methylation of 2 CpG sites in the promoter region of BRCA1 oncosuppressor. RESULTS: BRCA1 promoter methylation rate in PBCs was 47.1% with a 95% confidence interval [46.1; 48.1] in breast cancer patients, and 45.9% with a 95% confidence interval [45.0; 46.8] in controls. We found a trend toward BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation in PBCs of sporadic breast cancer patients compared with controls. Association between methylation and clinicopathological features was evaluated using statistical tests. BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs increased significantly in breast cancer patients compared with controls, for age over 70 years (p=0.022), in post-menopausal status (p=0.013), for a body mass index (BMI) <20 (p=0.0095) or a waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) </=76.8 (p=0.0027). We also found an association of increased BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs with ACA/ACA genotype for the SNP Thr594Thr in ESR (estrogen receptor gene), known to be associated with breast cancer risk (p=0.092), reflecting the reduced presence of this genotype in this breast cancer case-control study. CONCLUSION: Analysis of site-specific DNA methylation in PBCs by QAMA provides quantitative DNA methylation values that may serve as important prognostic indicators.. OBJECTIVE: Epigenetics, particularly DNA methylation, has recently been shown to be important in breast cancer initiation. We investigated the clinical and prognostic importance of whole blood breast cancer early onset gene 1 (BRCA1) DNA methylation in sporadic breast cancer. METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood cells (PBCs) of 902 breast cancer patients at diagnosis, with no BRCA1 mutation, and 990 control women. DNA methylation was measured by quantitative analysis of methylated alleles (QAMA) to estimate the extent of methylation of 2 CpG sites in the promoter region of BRCA1 oncosuppressor. RESULTS: BRCA1 promoter methylation rate in PBCs was 47.1% with a 95% confidence interval [46.1; 48.1] in breast cancer patients, and 45.9% with a 95% confidence interval [45.0; 46.8] in controls. We found a trend toward BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation in PBCs of sporadic breast cancer patients compared with controls. Association between methylation and clinicopathological features was evaluated using statistical tests. BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs increased significantly in breast cancer patients compared with controls, for age over 70 years (p=0.022), in post-menopausal status (p=0.013), for a body mass index (BMI) <20 (p=0.0095) or a waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) </=76.8 (p=0.0027). We also found an association of increased BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs with ACA/ACA genotype for the SNP Thr594Thr in ESR (estrogen receptor gene), known to be associated with breast cancer risk (p=0.092), reflecting the reduced presence of this genotype in this breast cancer case-control study. CONCLUSION: Analysis of site-specific DNA methylation in PBCs by QAMA provides quantitative DNA methylation values that may serve as important prognostic indicators.

DNA methylation patterns have been recognised as cancer-specific markers with high potential for clinical applications. We aimed at identifying methylation variations that differentiate between breast cancers and other breast tissue entities to establish a signature for diagnosis. Candidate genomic loci were analysed in 117 fresh-frozen breast specimens, which included cancer, benign and normal breast tissues from patients as well as material from healthy individuals. A cancer-specific DNA methylation signature was identified by microarray analysis in a test set of samples (n = 52, p < 2.1 x 10(-4)) and its performance was assessed through bisulphite pyrosequencing in an independent validation set (n = 65, p < 1.9 x 10(-7)). The signature is associated with SFRP2 and GHSR genes, and exhibited significant hypermethylation in cancers. Normal-appearing breast tissues from cancer patients were also methylated at these loci but to a markedly lower extent. This occurrence of methylated DNA in normal breast tissue of cancer patients is indicative of an epigenetic field defect. Concerning diagnosis, receiver operating characteristic curves and the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) analysis demonstrated a very high sensitivity and specificity of 89.3 and 100 %, respectively, for the GHSR methylation pattern (AUC >0.99). To date, this represents the DNA methylation marker of the highest sensitivity and specificity for breast cancer diagnosis. Functionally, ectopic expression of GHSR in a cell line model reduced breast cancer cell invasion without affecting cell viability upon stimulation of cells with ghrelin. Our data suggest a link between epigenetic down-regulation of GHSR and breast cancer cell invasion.. DNA methylation patterns have been recognised as cancer-specific markers with high potential for clinical applications. We aimed at identifying methylation variations that differentiate between breast cancers and other breast tissue entities to establish a signature for diagnosis. Candidate genomic loci were analysed in 117 fresh-frozen breast specimens, which included cancer, benign and normal breast tissues from patients as well as material from healthy individuals. A cancer-specific DNA methylation signature was identified by microarray analysis in a test set of samples (n = 52, p < 2.1 x 10(-4)) and its performance was assessed through bisulphite pyrosequencing in an independent validation set (n = 65, p < 1.9 x 10(-7)). The signature is associated with SFRP2 and GHSR genes, and exhibited significant hypermethylation in cancers. Normal-appearing breast tissues from cancer patients were also methylated at these loci but to a markedly lower extent. This occurrence of methylated DNA in normal breast tissue of cancer patients is indicative of an epigenetic field defect. Concerning diagnosis, receiver operating characteristic curves and the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) analysis demonstrated a very high sensitivity and specificity of 89.3 and 100 %, respectively, for the GHSR methylation pattern (AUC >0.99). To date, this represents the DNA methylation marker of the highest sensitivity and specificity for breast cancer diagnosis. Functionally, ectopic expression of GHSR in a cell line model reduced breast cancer cell invasion without affecting cell viability upon stimulation of cells with ghrelin. Our data suggest a link between epigenetic down-regulation of GHSR and breast cancer cell invasion.

The retinoic acid receptor beta (RARbeta), a putative tumor suppressor gene, has been reported to be poorly expressed in breast cancer. In this report using the methylation-specific PCR reaction we observed DNA methylation in the promoter region of RARbeta in several primary breast tumors. DNA sequence analysis showed that the positions of 5-methylcytosine in the RARbeta promoter region was almost identical to that reported previously by our laboratory for human DLD-1 colon carcinoma cells (Anti-Cancer Drugs 1998; 9: 743). Several other cancer-related genes have been also reported to be silenced by DNA methylation, including the p16 tumor suppressor gene, E-cadherin, an invasion suppressor gene and the estrogen receptor gene in breast cancer cell lines. Since breast cancer cells have several potential target genes for the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR), we investigated the in vitro antineoplastic activity of this analog on the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. We report that 5-Aza-CdR is a potent growth inhibitor and a potent cytotoxic agent against the breast carcinoma cells. These results suggest that 5-Aza-CdR may be an interesting agent to investigate in patients with breast cancer resistant to conventional chemotherapy.. The retinoic acid receptor beta (RARbeta), a putative tumor suppressor gene, has been reported to be poorly expressed in breast cancer. In this report using the methylation-specific PCR reaction we observed DNA methylation in the promoter region of RARbeta in several primary breast tumors. DNA sequence analysis showed that the positions of 5-methylcytosine in the RARbeta promoter region was almost identical to that reported previously by our laboratory for human DLD-1 colon carcinoma cells (Anti-Cancer Drugs 1998; 9: 743). Several other cancer-related genes have been also reported to be silenced by DNA methylation, including the p16 tumor suppressor gene, E-cadherin, an invasion suppressor gene and the estrogen receptor gene in breast cancer cell lines. Since breast cancer cells have several potential target genes for the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR), we investigated the in vitro antineoplastic activity of this analog on the human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231. We report that 5-Aza-CdR is a potent growth inhibitor and a potent cytotoxic agent against the breast carcinoma cells. These results suggest that 5-Aza-CdR may be an interesting agent to investigate in patients with breast cancer resistant to conventional chemotherapy.

Physical activity is associated with a lower risk of breast, colon, and endometrial cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms such as changes in DNA methylation may help to explain these protective effects. We assessed the impact of a one year aerobic exercise intervention on DNA methylation biomarkers believed to play a role in carcinogenesis. The Alberta Physical Activity and Breast Cancer Prevention (ALPHA) Trial was a two-armed randomized controlled trial in 320 healthy, inactive, postmenopausal women with no history of cancer. In an ancillary analysis, frozen blood samples (n = 256) were reassessed for levels of DNA methylation within LINE-1 and Alu repeats as well as within the promoter regions of APC, BRCA1, RASSF1, and hTERT genes. Differences between the exercise and control arm at 12-months, after adjusting for baseline values, were estimated within an intent-to-treat and per-protocol analysis using linear regression. No significant differences in DNA methylation between the exercise and control arms were observed. In an exploratory analysis, we found that the prospective change in estimated VO2max was negatively associated with RASSF1 methylation in a dose-response manner (p-trend = 0.04). A year-long aerobic exercise intervention does not affect LINE-1, Alu, APC, BRCA1, RASSF1, or hTERT methylation in healthy, inactive, postmenopausal women. Changes in DNA methylation within these genomic regions may not mediate the association between physical activity and cancer in healthy postmenopausal women. Additional research is needed to validate our findings with RASSF1 methylation. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00522262.. Physical activity is associated with a lower risk of breast, colon, and endometrial cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms such as changes in DNA methylation may help to explain these protective effects. We assessed the impact of a one year aerobic exercise intervention on DNA methylation biomarkers believed to play a role in carcinogenesis. The Alberta Physical Activity and Breast Cancer Prevention (ALPHA) Trial was a two-armed randomized controlled trial in 320 healthy, inactive, postmenopausal women with no history of cancer. In an ancillary analysis, frozen blood samples (n = 256) were reassessed for levels of DNA methylation within LINE-1 and Alu repeats as well as within the promoter regions of APC, BRCA1, RASSF1, and hTERT genes. Differences between the exercise and control arm at 12-months, after adjusting for baseline values, were estimated within an intent-to-treat and per-protocol analysis using linear regression. No significant differences in DNA methylation between the exercise and control arms were observed. In an exploratory analysis, we found that the prospective change in estimated VO2max was negatively associated with RASSF1 methylation in a dose-response manner (p-trend = 0.04). A year-long aerobic exercise intervention does not affect LINE-1, Alu, APC, BRCA1, RASSF1, or hTERT methylation in healthy, inactive, postmenopausal women. Changes in DNA methylation within these genomic regions may not mediate the association between physical activity and cancer in healthy postmenopausal women. Additional research is needed to validate our findings with RASSF1 methylation. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00522262.

The extent to which physical activity reduces breast cancer risk through changes in global DNA methylation is unknown. We systematically identified studies that investigated the association between: (i) physical activity and global DNA methylation; or (ii) global DNA methylation and breast cancer risk. Associations were quantified using random-effects models. Heterogeneity was investigated through subgroup analyses and the Q-test and I (2) statistics. Twenty-four studies were reviewed. We observed a trend between higher levels of physical activity and higher levels of global DNA methylation [pooled standardized mean difference = 0.19; 95% confidence interval (CI), -0.03-0.40; P = 0.09] which, in turn, had a suggestive association with a reduced breast cancer risk (pooled relative risk = 0.70; 95% CI, 0.49-1.02; P = 0.06). In subgroup analyses, a positive association between physical activity and global DNA methylation was observed among studies assessing physical activity over long periods of time (P = 0.02). Similarly, the association between global DNA methylation and breast cancer was statistically significant for prospective cohort studies (P = 0.007). Despite the heterogeneous evidence base, the literature suggests that physical activity reduces the risk of breast cancer through increased global DNA methylation. This study is the first to systematically overview the complete biologic pathway between physical activity, global DNA methylation, and breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 27(11); 1320-31. (c)2018 AACR.. The extent to which physical activity reduces breast cancer risk through changes in global DNA methylation is unknown. We systematically identified studies that investigated the association between: (i) physical activity and global DNA methylation; or (ii) global DNA methylation and breast cancer risk. Associations were quantified using random-effects models. Heterogeneity was investigated through subgroup analyses and the Q-test and I (2) statistics. Twenty-four studies were reviewed. We observed a trend between higher levels of physical activity and higher levels of global DNA methylation [pooled standardized mean difference = 0.19; 95% confidence interval (CI), -0.03-0.40; P = 0.09] which, in turn, had a suggestive association with a reduced breast cancer risk (pooled relative risk = 0.70; 95% CI, 0.49-1.02; P = 0.06). In subgroup analyses, a positive association between physical activity and global DNA methylation was observed among studies assessing physical activity over long periods of time (P = 0.02). Similarly, the association between global DNA methylation and breast cancer was statistically significant for prospective cohort studies (P = 0.007). Despite the heterogeneous evidence base, the literature suggests that physical activity reduces the risk of breast cancer through increased global DNA methylation. This study is the first to systematically overview the complete biologic pathway between physical activity, global DNA methylation, and breast cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 27(11); 1320-31. (c)2018 AACR.

The aim of the study was to assess how hypermethylation of the ON promoter of the estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) gene affects its expression (at the mRNA and protein level) and to correlate these with some clinical and histopathological parameters. A total of 131 samples of frozen breast cancer tissue was analyzed. A custom-designed, two-step PCR method was used to measure the methylation index of the ERbeta gene ON promoter region. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed to quantify mRNA of the ERbeta1 isoform, while ERbeta1 protein was determined using the Western blot method. There was a significant difference in the methylation index of the ERbeta gene ON promoter between the groups of patients with negative and positive axillary lymph node status (P = 0.03). In addition, the methylation index of the ON promoter was positively correlated with estrogen receptor alfa (ERalpha) protein levels (rho = 0.31, P = 0.02). There was a significant difference in the methylation index of the ON promoter between the progesterone receptor (PR)-negative and PR-positive groups of patients (P = 0.01). ERbeta1 protein levels were negatively correlated with ERalpha protein (rho = -0.27, P < 0.01). The methylation index of the ON promoter could be a more reliable additional parameter for prediction and/or prognosis in breast cancer than ERbeta1-mRNA and/or protein levels.. The aim of the study was to assess how hypermethylation of the ON promoter of the estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) gene affects its expression (at the mRNA and protein level) and to correlate these with some clinical and histopathological parameters. A total of 131 samples of frozen breast cancer tissue was analyzed. A custom-designed, two-step PCR method was used to measure the methylation index of the ERbeta gene ON promoter region. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed to quantify mRNA of the ERbeta1 isoform, while ERbeta1 protein was determined using the Western blot method. There was a significant difference in the methylation index of the ERbeta gene ON promoter between the groups of patients with negative and positive axillary lymph node status (P = 0.03). In addition, the methylation index of the ON promoter was positively correlated with estrogen receptor alfa (ERalpha) protein levels (rho = 0.31, P = 0.02). There was a significant difference in the methylation index of the ON promoter between the progesterone receptor (PR)-negative and PR-positive groups of patients (P = 0.01). ERbeta1 protein levels were negatively correlated with ERalpha protein (rho = -0.27, P < 0.01). The methylation index of the ON promoter could be a more reliable additional parameter for prediction and/or prognosis in breast cancer than ERbeta1-mRNA and/or protein levels.

Breast cancer is a group of clinically, histopathologically and molecularly heterogeneous diseases, with different outcomes and responses to treatment. Triple-negative (TN) breast cancers are defined as tumors that lack the expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor 2. This subgroup accounts for 15% of all types of breast cancer and its prevalence is higher among young African, African-American and Latino women. The hypermethylation of CpG islands (CpGI) is a common epigenetic alteration for suppressing gene expression in breast cancer and has been shown to be a key factor in breast carcinogenesis. In this study we analyzed the hypermethylation of 110 CpGI within 69 cancer-related genes in TN tumors. For the methylation analysis, we used the methyl-specific multiplex-ligation probe amplification assay. We found that the number of methylated CpGI is similar between TN and non-TN tumors, but the methylated genes between the groups are different. The methylation profile of TN tumors is defined by the methylation of five genes (that is, CDKN2B, CD44, MGMT, RB and p73) plus the non-methylation of 11 genes (that is, GSTP1, PMS2, MSH2, MLH1, MSH3, MSH6, DLC1, CACNA1A, CACNA1G, TWIST1 and ID4). We conclude that TN tumors have a specific methylation profile. Our findings give new information for better understanding tumor etiology and encourage future studies on potential drug targets for triple-negative breast tumors, which now lack a specific treatment.. Breast cancer is a group of clinically, histopathologically and molecularly heterogeneous diseases, with different outcomes and responses to treatment. Triple-negative (TN) breast cancers are defined as tumors that lack the expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor 2. This subgroup accounts for 15% of all types of breast cancer and its prevalence is higher among young African, African-American and Latino women. The hypermethylation of CpG islands (CpGI) is a common epigenetic alteration for suppressing gene expression in breast cancer and has been shown to be a key factor in breast carcinogenesis. In this study we analyzed the hypermethylation of 110 CpGI within 69 cancer-related genes in TN tumors. For the methylation analysis, we used the methyl-specific multiplex-ligation probe amplification assay. We found that the number of methylated CpGI is similar between TN and non-TN tumors, but the methylated genes between the groups are different. The methylation profile of TN tumors is defined by the methylation of five genes (that is, CDKN2B, CD44, MGMT, RB and p73) plus the non-methylation of 11 genes (that is, GSTP1, PMS2, MSH2, MLH1, MSH3, MSH6, DLC1, CACNA1A, CACNA1G, TWIST1 and ID4). We conclude that TN tumors have a specific methylation profile. Our findings give new information for better understanding tumor etiology and encourage future studies on potential drug targets for triple-negative breast tumors, which now lack a specific treatment.

Few studies have evaluated the association between DNA methylation in white blood cells (WBC) and the risk of breast cancer. The evaluation of WBC DNA methylation as a biomarker of cancer risk is of particular importance as peripheral blood is often available in prospective cohorts and easier to obtain than tumor or normal tissues. Here, we used prediagnostic blood samples from three studies to analyze WBC DNA methylation of two ATM intragenic loci (ATMmvp2a and ATMmvp2b) and genome-wide DNA methylation in long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE1) repetitive elements. Samples were from a case-control study derived from a cohort of high-risk breast cancer families (KConFab) and nested case-control studies in two prospective cohorts: Breakthrough Generations Study (BGS) and European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Bisulfite pyrosequencing was used to quantify methylation from 640 incident cases of invasive breast cancer and 741 controls. Quintile analyses for ATMmvp2a showed an increased risk of breast cancer limited to women in the highest quintile [OR, 1.89; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.36-2.64; P = 1.64 x 10(-4)]. We found no significant differences in estimates across studies or in analyses stratified by family history or menopausal status. However, a more consistent association was observed in younger than in older women and individually significant in KConFab and BGS, but not EPIC. We observed no differences in LINE1 or ATMmvp2b methylation between cases and controls. Together, our findings indicate that WBC DNA methylation levels at ATM could be a marker of breast cancer risk and further support the pursuit of epigenome-wide association studies of peripheral blood DNA methylation.. Few studies have evaluated the association between DNA methylation in white blood cells (WBC) and the risk of breast cancer. The evaluation of WBC DNA methylation as a biomarker of cancer risk is of particular importance as peripheral blood is often available in prospective cohorts and easier to obtain than tumor or normal tissues. Here, we used prediagnostic blood samples from three studies to analyze WBC DNA methylation of two ATM intragenic loci (ATMmvp2a and ATMmvp2b) and genome-wide DNA methylation in long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE1) repetitive elements. Samples were from a case-control study derived from a cohort of high-risk breast cancer families (KConFab) and nested case-control studies in two prospective cohorts: Breakthrough Generations Study (BGS) and European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Bisulfite pyrosequencing was used to quantify methylation from 640 incident cases of invasive breast cancer and 741 controls. Quintile analyses for ATMmvp2a showed an increased risk of breast cancer limited to women in the highest quintile [OR, 1.89; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.36-2.64; P = 1.64 x 10(-4)]. We found no significant differences in estimates across studies or in analyses stratified by family history or menopausal status. However, a more consistent association was observed in younger than in older women and individually significant in KConFab and BGS, but not EPIC. We observed no differences in LINE1 or ATMmvp2b methylation between cases and controls. Together, our findings indicate that WBC DNA methylation levels at ATM could be a marker of breast cancer risk and further support the pursuit of epigenome-wide association studies of peripheral blood DNA methylation.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an important mechanism for gene silencing and has already been described for several genes in breast cancer. A previous immunohistochemistry study demonstrated a decrease of K(v)1.3 potassium channel expression in breast adenocarcinoma compared to normal breast tissue. METHODS: Methyl-specific PCR (MSP), immunohistochemistry and RNA extraction were performed on breast adenocarcinoma. MSP and DNA extraction were also performed on one breast carcinoma cell line and on primary culture normal cells. RESULTS: DNA methylation of K(v)1.3 gene promoter was observed in 42.3% of samples (22/52). The methylated status was associated with poorly differentiated tumors (p=0.04) and younger patients (p=0.048). Decreased K(v)1.3 expression was observed in grade III tumors, at both the mRNA and protein levels, while methylation increased in grade III tumors. Finally, K(v)1.3 gene promoter was methylated in the MCF-7 breast carcinoma cell line while promoter methylation was absent in primary culture of normal breast cells (HMEpC). CONCLUSION: We report, for the first time, the methylation of the K(v)1.3 gene promoter in breast adenocarcinoma. Our data suggest that DNA methylation is responsible for a decrease of K(v)1.3 gene expression in breast adenocarcinoma and is associated with poorly differentiated tumors and younger patients.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is an important mechanism for gene silencing and has already been described for several genes in breast cancer. A previous immunohistochemistry study demonstrated a decrease of K(v)1.3 potassium channel expression in breast adenocarcinoma compared to normal breast tissue. METHODS: Methyl-specific PCR (MSP), immunohistochemistry and RNA extraction were performed on breast adenocarcinoma. MSP and DNA extraction were also performed on one breast carcinoma cell line and on primary culture normal cells. RESULTS: DNA methylation of K(v)1.3 gene promoter was observed in 42.3% of samples (22/52). The methylated status was associated with poorly differentiated tumors (p=0.04) and younger patients (p=0.048). Decreased K(v)1.3 expression was observed in grade III tumors, at both the mRNA and protein levels, while methylation increased in grade III tumors. Finally, K(v)1.3 gene promoter was methylated in the MCF-7 breast carcinoma cell line while promoter methylation was absent in primary culture of normal breast cells (HMEpC). CONCLUSION: We report, for the first time, the methylation of the K(v)1.3 gene promoter in breast adenocarcinoma. Our data suggest that DNA methylation is responsible for a decrease of K(v)1.3 gene expression in breast adenocarcinoma and is associated with poorly differentiated tumors and younger patients.

PURPOSE: BRCA1 germline mutation is closely associated with triple-negative breast cancer. BRCA deficiency leads to impaired DNA repair and tumor development, and understanding this deficiency, in both hereditary and sporadic scenarios, is of great clinical and biological interest. Here, we investigated germline or somatic events that might lead to BRCA1 impairment in triple-negative breast cancer. We also analyzed the clinical implications associated with BRCA deficiency. METHODS: Next-generation sequencing for the BRCA1/2 genes and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for the BRCA1 gene were performed for mutation screening. A customized bisulfite next-generation sequencing approach was used for assessing BRCA1 promoter methylation status in tumor tissue. RESULTS: A total of 131 triple-negative cases were assessed, and germline pathogenic variants were detected in 13.0% of all cases and in 26% of cases diagnosed in young women. Most germline pathogenic variants (88.2%) occurred in the BRCA1 gene. BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was detected in 20.6% of tumors; none of these tumors were in BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant carriers. BRCA1 impairment by either germline or somatic events was significantly more frequent in young women (55% in those </= 40 years; 33% in those 41-50 years; 22% in those > 50 years of age) and associated with better overall and disease-free survival rates in this group of patients. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA1 deficiency was recurrent in early-onset triple-negative breast cancer in Brazilian patients and associated with improved survival. With the new treatment modalities being investigated, including poly (ADP-ribose)-polymerase (PARP) inhibitor therapy, our results suggest that a significant proportion of young women with this subtype of tumor might benefit from PARP inhibitor treatment, which warrants further investigation.. PURPOSE: BRCA1 germline mutation is closely associated with triple-negative breast cancer. BRCA deficiency leads to impaired DNA repair and tumor development, and understanding this deficiency, in both hereditary and sporadic scenarios, is of great clinical and biological interest. Here, we investigated germline or somatic events that might lead to BRCA1 impairment in triple-negative breast cancer. We also analyzed the clinical implications associated with BRCA deficiency. METHODS: Next-generation sequencing for the BRCA1/2 genes and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) for the BRCA1 gene were performed for mutation screening. A customized bisulfite next-generation sequencing approach was used for assessing BRCA1 promoter methylation status in tumor tissue. RESULTS: A total of 131 triple-negative cases were assessed, and germline pathogenic variants were detected in 13.0% of all cases and in 26% of cases diagnosed in young women. Most germline pathogenic variants (88.2%) occurred in the BRCA1 gene. BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was detected in 20.6% of tumors; none of these tumors were in BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant carriers. BRCA1 impairment by either germline or somatic events was significantly more frequent in young women (55% in those </= 40 years; 33% in those 41-50 years; 22% in those > 50 years of age) and associated with better overall and disease-free survival rates in this group of patients. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA1 deficiency was recurrent in early-onset triple-negative breast cancer in Brazilian patients and associated with improved survival. With the new treatment modalities being investigated, including poly (ADP-ribose)-polymerase (PARP) inhibitor therapy, our results suggest that a significant proportion of young women with this subtype of tumor might benefit from PARP inhibitor treatment, which warrants further investigation.

Mammographic screening has been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality in women over the age of 50 years, and to a lesser extent in younger women. The sensitivity of mammography, however, is reduced in some groups of women. There remains a need for a minimally invasive, cost-effective procedure that could be used along side mammography to improve screening sensitivity. Silencing of tumor suppressor genes through promoter hypermethylation is known to be a frequent and early event in carcinogenesis. Further, changes in methylation patterns observed in tumors are also detectable in the circulation of women with breast cancer. This makes these alterations candidate markers for early tumor detection. In this paper, we review the current literature on promoter hypermethylation changes and breast cancer and discuss issues that remain to be addressed in order for the potential of these markers to augment the sensitivity of screening mammography. In general, studies in well-defined populations, including appropriate controls and larger numbers are needed. Further, focus on the optimization of methods of methylation detection in small amounts of DNA is needed.. Mammographic screening has been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality in women over the age of 50 years, and to a lesser extent in younger women. The sensitivity of mammography, however, is reduced in some groups of women. There remains a need for a minimally invasive, cost-effective procedure that could be used along side mammography to improve screening sensitivity. Silencing of tumor suppressor genes through promoter hypermethylation is known to be a frequent and early event in carcinogenesis. Further, changes in methylation patterns observed in tumors are also detectable in the circulation of women with breast cancer. This makes these alterations candidate markers for early tumor detection. In this paper, we review the current literature on promoter hypermethylation changes and breast cancer and discuss issues that remain to be addressed in order for the potential of these markers to augment the sensitivity of screening mammography. In general, studies in well-defined populations, including appropriate controls and larger numbers are needed. Further, focus on the optimization of methods of methylation detection in small amounts of DNA is needed.

BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a frequent and early event in breast carcinogenesis. Paired tumor tissue and serum samples from women with breast cancer show that promoter methylation is detectable in both sample types, with good concordance. This suggests the potential for these serum markers to be used for breast cancer detection. METHODS: The current study was a case-control study nested within the prospective New York University Women's Health Study cohort aimed to assess the ability of promoter methylation in serum to detect pre-clinical disease. Cases were women with blood samples collected within the 6 months preceding breast cancer diagnosis (n=50). Each case was matched to 2 healthy cancer-free controls and 1 cancer-free control with a history of benign breast disease (BBD). RESULTS: Promoter methylation analysis of four cancer-related genes: -RASSF1A, GSTP1, APC and RARbeta2, - was conducted using quantitative methylation-specific PCR. Results showed that the frequency of methylation was lower than expected among cases and higher than expected among controls. Methylation was detected in the promoter region of: RASSF1A in 22.0%, 22.9% and 17.2% of cases, BBD controls and healthy controls respectively; GSTP1 in 4%, 10.4% and 7.1% respectively; APC in 2.0%, 4.4% and 4.2% respectively and RARbeta2 in 6.7%, 2.3% and 1.1% respectively. CONCLUSION: Methylation status of the four genes included in this study was unable to distinguish between cases and either control group. This study highlights some methodological issues to be addressed in planning prospective studies to evaluate methylation markers as diagnostic biomarkers.. BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a frequent and early event in breast carcinogenesis. Paired tumor tissue and serum samples from women with breast cancer show that promoter methylation is detectable in both sample types, with good concordance. This suggests the potential for these serum markers to be used for breast cancer detection. METHODS: The current study was a case-control study nested within the prospective New York University Women's Health Study cohort aimed to assess the ability of promoter methylation in serum to detect pre-clinical disease. Cases were women with blood samples collected within the 6 months preceding breast cancer diagnosis (n=50). Each case was matched to 2 healthy cancer-free controls and 1 cancer-free control with a history of benign breast disease (BBD). RESULTS: Promoter methylation analysis of four cancer-related genes: -RASSF1A, GSTP1, APC and RARbeta2, - was conducted using quantitative methylation-specific PCR. Results showed that the frequency of methylation was lower than expected among cases and higher than expected among controls. Methylation was detected in the promoter region of: RASSF1A in 22.0%, 22.9% and 17.2% of cases, BBD controls and healthy controls respectively; GSTP1 in 4%, 10.4% and 7.1% respectively; APC in 2.0%, 4.4% and 4.2% respectively and RARbeta2 in 6.7%, 2.3% and 1.1% respectively. CONCLUSION: Methylation status of the four genes included in this study was unable to distinguish between cases and either control group. This study highlights some methodological issues to be addressed in planning prospective studies to evaluate methylation markers as diagnostic biomarkers.

OBJECTIVE: Under normoxia, non-malignant cells rely on oxidative phosphorylation for their ATP production, whereas cancer cells rely on Glycolysis; a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect. We aimed to elucidate the mechanisms contributing to the Warburg effect in human breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) isoenzymes were profiled using zymography. LDH-B subunit expression was assessed by reverse transcription PCR in cells, and by Immunohistochemistry in breast tissues. LDH-B promoter methylation was assessed by sequencing bisulfite modified DNA. RESULTS: Absent or decreased expression of LDH isoenzymes 1-4, were seen in T-47D and MCF7 cells. Absence of LDH-B mRNA was seen in T-47D cells, and its expression was restored following treatment with the demethylating agent 5'Azacytadine. LDH-B promoter methylation was identified in T-47D and MCF7 cells, and in 25/25 cases of breast cancer tissues, but not in 5/5 cases of normal breast tissues. Absent immuno-expression of LDH-B protein (<10% cells stained), was seen in 23/26 (88%) breast cancer cases, and in 4/8 cases of adjacent ductal carcinoma in situ lesions. Exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia (1% O(2)), for 48 hours resulted in significant increases in lactate levels in both MCF7 (14.0 fold, p = 0.002), and T-47D cells (2.9 fold, p = 0.009), but not in MDA-MB-436 (-0.9 fold, p = 0.229), or MCF10AT (1.2 fold, p = 0.09) cells. CONCLUSIONS: Loss of LDH-B expression is an early and frequent event in human breast cancer occurring due to promoter methylation, and is likely to contribute to an enhanced glycolysis of cancer cells under hypoxia.. OBJECTIVE: Under normoxia, non-malignant cells rely on oxidative phosphorylation for their ATP production, whereas cancer cells rely on Glycolysis; a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect. We aimed to elucidate the mechanisms contributing to the Warburg effect in human breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) isoenzymes were profiled using zymography. LDH-B subunit expression was assessed by reverse transcription PCR in cells, and by Immunohistochemistry in breast tissues. LDH-B promoter methylation was assessed by sequencing bisulfite modified DNA. RESULTS: Absent or decreased expression of LDH isoenzymes 1-4, were seen in T-47D and MCF7 cells. Absence of LDH-B mRNA was seen in T-47D cells, and its expression was restored following treatment with the demethylating agent 5'Azacytadine. LDH-B promoter methylation was identified in T-47D and MCF7 cells, and in 25/25 cases of breast cancer tissues, but not in 5/5 cases of normal breast tissues. Absent immuno-expression of LDH-B protein (<10% cells stained), was seen in 23/26 (88%) breast cancer cases, and in 4/8 cases of adjacent ductal carcinoma in situ lesions. Exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia (1% O(2)), for 48 hours resulted in significant increases in lactate levels in both MCF7 (14.0 fold, p = 0.002), and T-47D cells (2.9 fold, p = 0.009), but not in MDA-MB-436 (-0.9 fold, p = 0.229), or MCF10AT (1.2 fold, p = 0.09) cells. CONCLUSIONS: Loss of LDH-B expression is an early and frequent event in human breast cancer occurring due to promoter methylation, and is likely to contribute to an enhanced glycolysis of cancer cells under hypoxia.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among Turkish women and both the incidence and associated mortality appear to be increasing. Of particular concern is the percentage of young women diagnosed with breast cancer; roughly 20% of all breast cancer diagnoses in Turkey are in women younger than 40 years. Increased DNA methylation in the promoter region of tumor suppressor genes is a promising molecular biomarker, and human milk provides exfoliated breast epithelial cells appropriate for DNA methylation analyses. Comparisons between DNA methylation patterns in epithelial (epithelial-enriched) and nonepithelial (epithelial-depleted) cell fractions from breast milk have not been reported previously. OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we examined promoter methylation of 3 tumor suppressor genes in epithelial-enriched and epithelial-depleted cell fractions isolated from breast milk of 43 Turkish women. METHODS: Percentage methylation in the promoter region of Rass association domain family 1 (RASSF1), secreted frizzle related protein 1 (SFRP1), and glutathione-S-transferase class pi 1 was determined by pyrosequencing of the epithelial-enriched and epithelial-depleted cell fractions. RESULTS: Pyrosequencing identified a few subjects with significantly increased methylation in 1 or more genes. There was little correlation between the 2 cell fractions within individuals; only 1 woman had increased methylation for 1 gene (SFRP1) in both her enriched and depleted cell fractions. Methylation was positively associated with age for SFRP1 (epithelial-depleted fraction) and with body mass index for RASSF1 (epithelial-enriched cell fraction), respectively. CONCLUSION: Overall, results show that the methylation signals vary between different cell types in breast milk and suggest that breast milk can be used to assess DNA methylation patterns associated with increased breast cancer risk.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer among Turkish women and both the incidence and associated mortality appear to be increasing. Of particular concern is the percentage of young women diagnosed with breast cancer; roughly 20% of all breast cancer diagnoses in Turkey are in women younger than 40 years. Increased DNA methylation in the promoter region of tumor suppressor genes is a promising molecular biomarker, and human milk provides exfoliated breast epithelial cells appropriate for DNA methylation analyses. Comparisons between DNA methylation patterns in epithelial (epithelial-enriched) and nonepithelial (epithelial-depleted) cell fractions from breast milk have not been reported previously. OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we examined promoter methylation of 3 tumor suppressor genes in epithelial-enriched and epithelial-depleted cell fractions isolated from breast milk of 43 Turkish women. METHODS: Percentage methylation in the promoter region of Rass association domain family 1 (RASSF1), secreted frizzle related protein 1 (SFRP1), and glutathione-S-transferase class pi 1 was determined by pyrosequencing of the epithelial-enriched and epithelial-depleted cell fractions. RESULTS: Pyrosequencing identified a few subjects with significantly increased methylation in 1 or more genes. There was little correlation between the 2 cell fractions within individuals; only 1 woman had increased methylation for 1 gene (SFRP1) in both her enriched and depleted cell fractions. Methylation was positively associated with age for SFRP1 (epithelial-depleted fraction) and with body mass index for RASSF1 (epithelial-enriched cell fraction), respectively. CONCLUSION: Overall, results show that the methylation signals vary between different cell types in breast milk and suggest that breast milk can be used to assess DNA methylation patterns associated with increased breast cancer risk.

Accurately identifying women at increased risk of developing breast cancer will provide greater opportunity for early detection and prevention. DNA promoter methylation is a promising biomarker for assessing breast cancer risk. Breast milk contains large numbers of exfoliated epithelial cells that are ideal for methylation analyses. Exfoliated epithelial cells were isolated from the milk obtained from each breast of 134 women with a history of a non-proliferative benign breast biopsy (Biopsy Group). Promoter methylation of three tumor suppressor genes, RASSF1, SFRP1 and GSTP1, was assessed by pyrosequencing of bisulfite-modified DNA. Methylation scores from the milk of the 134 women in the Biopsy Group were compared to scores from 102 women for whom a breast biopsy was not a recruitment requirement (Reference Group). Mean methylation scores for RASSF1 and GSTP1 were significantly higher in the Biopsy than in the Reference Group. For all three genes the percentage of outlier scores was greater in the Biopsy than in the Reference Group but reached statistical significance only for GSTP1. A comparison between the biopsied and non-biopsied breasts of the Biopsy Group revealed higher mean methylation and a greater number of outlier scores in the biopsied breast for both SFRP1 and RASSF1, but not for GSTP1. This is the first evidence of CpG island methylation in tumor suppressor genes of women who may be at increased risk of developing breast cancer based on having had a prior breast biopsy.. Accurately identifying women at increased risk of developing breast cancer will provide greater opportunity for early detection and prevention. DNA promoter methylation is a promising biomarker for assessing breast cancer risk. Breast milk contains large numbers of exfoliated epithelial cells that are ideal for methylation analyses. Exfoliated epithelial cells were isolated from the milk obtained from each breast of 134 women with a history of a non-proliferative benign breast biopsy (Biopsy Group). Promoter methylation of three tumor suppressor genes, RASSF1, SFRP1 and GSTP1, was assessed by pyrosequencing of bisulfite-modified DNA. Methylation scores from the milk of the 134 women in the Biopsy Group were compared to scores from 102 women for whom a breast biopsy was not a recruitment requirement (Reference Group). Mean methylation scores for RASSF1 and GSTP1 were significantly higher in the Biopsy than in the Reference Group. For all three genes the percentage of outlier scores was greater in the Biopsy than in the Reference Group but reached statistical significance only for GSTP1. A comparison between the biopsied and non-biopsied breasts of the Biopsy Group revealed higher mean methylation and a greater number of outlier scores in the biopsied breast for both SFRP1 and RASSF1, but not for GSTP1. This is the first evidence of CpG island methylation in tumor suppressor genes of women who may be at increased risk of developing breast cancer based on having had a prior breast biopsy.

PURPOSE: Individuals who exercise are at lower risk for breast cancer and have better post-diagnosis outcomes. The biological mechanisms behind this association are unclear, but DNA methylation has been suggested. METHODS: We developed a composite measure of DNA methylation across 45 CpG sites on genes selected a priori. We examined the association of this measure to self-reported physical activity and objectively measured cardiovascular fitness in a sample of healthy nonsmoking adults (n = 64) in an exercise promotion intervention. RESULTS: Individuals who were more physically fit and who exercised more minutes per week had lower levels of DNA methylation. Those who increased their minutes of physical activity over 12 months experienced decreases in DNA methylation. CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation may be a mechanism linking exercise and cancer incidence and could serve as a biomarker for behavioral intervention trials. Studies with larger samples, objectively measured exercise, and more cancer-related markers are needed.. PURPOSE: Individuals who exercise are at lower risk for breast cancer and have better post-diagnosis outcomes. The biological mechanisms behind this association are unclear, but DNA methylation has been suggested. METHODS: We developed a composite measure of DNA methylation across 45 CpG sites on genes selected a priori. We examined the association of this measure to self-reported physical activity and objectively measured cardiovascular fitness in a sample of healthy nonsmoking adults (n = 64) in an exercise promotion intervention. RESULTS: Individuals who were more physically fit and who exercised more minutes per week had lower levels of DNA methylation. Those who increased their minutes of physical activity over 12 months experienced decreases in DNA methylation. CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation may be a mechanism linking exercise and cancer incidence and could serve as a biomarker for behavioral intervention trials. Studies with larger samples, objectively measured exercise, and more cancer-related markers are needed.

BACKGROUND: Random periareolar fine-needle aspiration (RP-FNA) is increasingly used in trials of breast cancer prevention for biomarker assessments. DNA methylation markers may have value as surrogate endpoint biomarkers, but this requires identification of biologically relevant markers suitable for paucicellular, lymphocyte-contaminated clinical samples. METHODS: Unbiased whole-genome 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AZA)-induced gene expression assays, followed by several phases of qualitative and quantitative methylation-specific PCR (MSP) testing, were used to identify novel breast cancer DNA methylation markers optimized for clinical FNA samples. RESULTS: The initial 5AZA experiment identified 453 genes whose expression was potentially regulated by promoter region methylation. Informatics filters excluded 273 genes unlikely to yield useful DNA methylation markers. MSP assays were designed for 271 of the remaining genes and, ultimately, 33 genes were identified that were differentially methylated in clinical breast cancer samples, as compared with benign RP-FNA samples, and never methylated in lymphocytes. A subset of these markers was validated by quantitative multiplex MSP in extended clinical sample sets. Using a novel permutation method for analysis of quantitative methylation data, PSAT1, GNE, CPNE8, and CXCL14 were found to correlate strongly with specific clinical and pathologic features of breast cancer. In general, our approach identified markers methylated in a smaller subpopulation of tumor cells than those identified in published methylation array studies. CONCLUSIONS: Clinically relevant DNA methylation markers were identified using a 5AZA-induced gene expression approach. IMPACT: These breast cancer-relevant, FNA-optimized DNA methylation markers may have value as surrogate endpoint biomarkers in RP-FNA studies.. BACKGROUND: Random periareolar fine-needle aspiration (RP-FNA) is increasingly used in trials of breast cancer prevention for biomarker assessments. DNA methylation markers may have value as surrogate endpoint biomarkers, but this requires identification of biologically relevant markers suitable for paucicellular, lymphocyte-contaminated clinical samples. METHODS: Unbiased whole-genome 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AZA)-induced gene expression assays, followed by several phases of qualitative and quantitative methylation-specific PCR (MSP) testing, were used to identify novel breast cancer DNA methylation markers optimized for clinical FNA samples. RESULTS: The initial 5AZA experiment identified 453 genes whose expression was potentially regulated by promoter region methylation. Informatics filters excluded 273 genes unlikely to yield useful DNA methylation markers. MSP assays were designed for 271 of the remaining genes and, ultimately, 33 genes were identified that were differentially methylated in clinical breast cancer samples, as compared with benign RP-FNA samples, and never methylated in lymphocytes. A subset of these markers was validated by quantitative multiplex MSP in extended clinical sample sets. Using a novel permutation method for analysis of quantitative methylation data, PSAT1, GNE, CPNE8, and CXCL14 were found to correlate strongly with specific clinical and pathologic features of breast cancer. In general, our approach identified markers methylated in a smaller subpopulation of tumor cells than those identified in published methylation array studies. CONCLUSIONS: Clinically relevant DNA methylation markers were identified using a 5AZA-induced gene expression approach. IMPACT: These breast cancer-relevant, FNA-optimized DNA methylation markers may have value as surrogate endpoint biomarkers in RP-FNA studies.

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer worldwide. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is no exception, with ever increasing incidence rates. An interesting feature of this disease is the relatively young age of the affected women. The average age in the present cohort of 100 sporadic cases of invasive ductal carcinomas was 45 years, with a median of 46 years (range between 19-81 years). In an effort to understand the molecular signature of BC in the Saudi population, we undertook this study to profile the methylation events in a series of key genes including Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 isoform a (RASSF1A), hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB2), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR), paired-like homeodomain 2 (PITX2), secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), myogenic differentiation 1 (MYOD1), and slit homolog 2 (SLIT2), using MethyLight analysis in archival tumour samples. Interestingly, the overall methylation levels were low in this cohort, with only 84% of the cases displaying methylation in one or more of the analysed genes. The frequency of RASSF1A methylation was the highest (65%), while there was almost complete absence of methylation of the ESR1 and the CDH1 genes (1% and 3%, respectively). Several statistically significant correlations were identified between specific methylation events and clinical parameters which gained more significance when analysis was limited to the estrogen receptor positive samples. Although there was no significant correlations between any methylation event and disease-specific survival, methylation of MYOD1 or RASSF1A was associated with lower disease-free survival and increased chance of disease recurrence. Furthermore, multivariate (Cox) regression analysis identified RASSF1A as an independent predictor of poor prognosis in terms of disease-free survival in this cohort. Our findings provide further evidence on the usefulness of RASSF1A methylation status as an informative prognostic biomarker in BC in a Saudi population.. Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer worldwide. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is no exception, with ever increasing incidence rates. An interesting feature of this disease is the relatively young age of the affected women. The average age in the present cohort of 100 sporadic cases of invasive ductal carcinomas was 45 years, with a median of 46 years (range between 19-81 years). In an effort to understand the molecular signature of BC in the Saudi population, we undertook this study to profile the methylation events in a series of key genes including Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 isoform a (RASSF1A), hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB2), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR), paired-like homeodomain 2 (PITX2), secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), myogenic differentiation 1 (MYOD1), and slit homolog 2 (SLIT2), using MethyLight analysis in archival tumour samples. Interestingly, the overall methylation levels were low in this cohort, with only 84% of the cases displaying methylation in one or more of the analysed genes. The frequency of RASSF1A methylation was the highest (65%), while there was almost complete absence of methylation of the ESR1 and the CDH1 genes (1% and 3%, respectively). Several statistically significant correlations were identified between specific methylation events and clinical parameters which gained more significance when analysis was limited to the estrogen receptor positive samples. Although there was no significant correlations between any methylation event and disease-specific survival, methylation of MYOD1 or RASSF1A was associated with lower disease-free survival and increased chance of disease recurrence. Furthermore, multivariate (Cox) regression analysis identified RASSF1A as an independent predictor of poor prognosis in terms of disease-free survival in this cohort. Our findings provide further evidence on the usefulness of RASSF1A methylation status as an informative prognostic biomarker in BC in a Saudi population.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), especially the subset with a basal phenotype, represents the most aggressive subtype of breast cancer. Unlike other solid tumors, TNBCs harbor a low number of driver mutations. Conversely, we and others have demonstrated a significant impact of epigenetic alterations, including DNA methylation and histone post-translational modifications, affecting TNBCs. Due to the promising results in pre-clinical studies, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are currently being tested in several clinical trials for breast cancer and other solid tumors. However, the genome-wide epigenetic and transcriptomic implications of HDAC inhibition are still poorly understood. Here, we provide detailed information about the design of a multi-platform dataset that describes the epigenomic and transcriptomic effects of HDACi. This dataset includes genome-wide chromatin accessibility (assessed by ATAC-Sequencing), DNA methylation (assessed by Illumina HM450K BeadChip) and gene expression (assessed by RNA-Sequencing) analyses before and after HDACi treatment of HCC1806 and MDA-MB-231, two human TNBC cell lines with basal-like phenotype.. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), especially the subset with a basal phenotype, represents the most aggressive subtype of breast cancer. Unlike other solid tumors, TNBCs harbor a low number of driver mutations. Conversely, we and others have demonstrated a significant impact of epigenetic alterations, including DNA methylation and histone post-translational modifications, affecting TNBCs. Due to the promising results in pre-clinical studies, histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are currently being tested in several clinical trials for breast cancer and other solid tumors. However, the genome-wide epigenetic and transcriptomic implications of HDAC inhibition are still poorly understood. Here, we provide detailed information about the design of a multi-platform dataset that describes the epigenomic and transcriptomic effects of HDACi. This dataset includes genome-wide chromatin accessibility (assessed by ATAC-Sequencing), DNA methylation (assessed by Illumina HM450K BeadChip) and gene expression (assessed by RNA-Sequencing) analyses before and after HDACi treatment of HCC1806 and MDA-MB-231, two human TNBC cell lines with basal-like phenotype.

In this study, we sought to assess the aberrant methylation of multiple tumor-suppressor genes in a single reaction by using methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Breast tumors and corresponding normal tissues of 77 patients were analyzed. In this study, 17 of 24 genes displayed promoter methylation in one or more of the tumor samples. The most frequently methylated genes were RASSF1 and GSTP1, followed by DAPK1 and CDKN2B. Our data indicate that the methylation of specific genes is a frequent event in breast cancer and show that MS-MLPA is a powerful tool to analyze epigenetic alterations for diagnostic, as well as therapeutic, purposes.. In this study, we sought to assess the aberrant methylation of multiple tumor-suppressor genes in a single reaction by using methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Breast tumors and corresponding normal tissues of 77 patients were analyzed. In this study, 17 of 24 genes displayed promoter methylation in one or more of the tumor samples. The most frequently methylated genes were RASSF1 and GSTP1, followed by DAPK1 and CDKN2B. Our data indicate that the methylation of specific genes is a frequent event in breast cancer and show that MS-MLPA is a powerful tool to analyze epigenetic alterations for diagnostic, as well as therapeutic, purposes.

BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are crucial for double-strand break repair by homologous recombination, and mutations in these genes are responsible for most familial breast carcinomas. Cells with inactivating mutations of the BRCA1 or BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes are sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) inhibitors. Already in 2010, it has been predicted, that BRCA1 hypermethylation might be sensitive to PARP1 inhibitor. However, till today, a statistically significant proof has been missing, and the effectiveness of PARP1 inhibitors for breast cancer caused by BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation remained elusive. Pyrosequencing has been proposed as an optimal method to investigate the methylation status of the BRCA1 genes. Here, we show for the first time that BRCA1 CpG island hypermethylation is sensitive to PARP1 inhibitors. In clinical settings, this might improve treatment response and provide a more personalized therapy for breast cancer patients. Furthermore, the determination of methylation status of BRCA1 and other genes of the BRCA/homologous recombination (HR) pathway may be an important predictive classifier of response to PARP inhibitor therapy.. BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are crucial for double-strand break repair by homologous recombination, and mutations in these genes are responsible for most familial breast carcinomas. Cells with inactivating mutations of the BRCA1 or BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes are sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) inhibitors. Already in 2010, it has been predicted, that BRCA1 hypermethylation might be sensitive to PARP1 inhibitor. However, till today, a statistically significant proof has been missing, and the effectiveness of PARP1 inhibitors for breast cancer caused by BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation remained elusive. Pyrosequencing has been proposed as an optimal method to investigate the methylation status of the BRCA1 genes. Here, we show for the first time that BRCA1 CpG island hypermethylation is sensitive to PARP1 inhibitors. In clinical settings, this might improve treatment response and provide a more personalized therapy for breast cancer patients. Furthermore, the determination of methylation status of BRCA1 and other genes of the BRCA/homologous recombination (HR) pathway may be an important predictive classifier of response to PARP inhibitor therapy.

BRCA1 promoter methylation is an essential epigenetic transcriptional silencing mechanism, related to breast cancer (BC) occurrence and progression. We quantified the methylation level of BRCA1 promoter and evaluated its significance as prognostic and predictive factor. BRCA1 promoter methylation level was quantified by pyrosequencing in surgical cancerous and adjacent normal specimens from 154 BC patients. A follow up of 98 months was conducted to assess the correlation between BRCA1-methylation level vs. overall survival (OS) and disease free survival (DFS). The mean methylation level in BC tissues was significantly higher (mean 32.6%; median 31.9%) than in adjacent normal samples (mean 16.2%; median 13.0%) (P < 0.0001). Tumor stage (R = 0.6165, P < 0.0001) and size (R = 0.7328, P < 0.0001) were significantly correlated with the methylation level. Patients with unmethylated BRCA1 had a better OS and DFS compared to the methylated group (each P < 0.0001). BRCA1 promoter methylation level has a statistically significance on survival in BC patients (HazR = 1.465, P = 0.000) and is an independent prognostic factor for OS in BC patients (HazR = 2.042, P = 0.000). Patients with ductal type, HER2 negative, lymph node negative stage 1+2 tumors had a better OS and DFS. Classification of grades and molecular subtypes did not show any prognostic significance. Pyrosequencing is a precise and efficient method to quantify BRCA1 promoter methylation level, with a high potential for future clinical implication, as it identifies subgroups of patients with poorer prognosis.. BRCA1 promoter methylation is an essential epigenetic transcriptional silencing mechanism, related to breast cancer (BC) occurrence and progression. We quantified the methylation level of BRCA1 promoter and evaluated its significance as prognostic and predictive factor. BRCA1 promoter methylation level was quantified by pyrosequencing in surgical cancerous and adjacent normal specimens from 154 BC patients. A follow up of 98 months was conducted to assess the correlation between BRCA1-methylation level vs. overall survival (OS) and disease free survival (DFS). The mean methylation level in BC tissues was significantly higher (mean 32.6%; median 31.9%) than in adjacent normal samples (mean 16.2%; median 13.0%) (P < 0.0001). Tumor stage (R = 0.6165, P < 0.0001) and size (R = 0.7328, P < 0.0001) were significantly correlated with the methylation level. Patients with unmethylated BRCA1 had a better OS and DFS compared to the methylated group (each P < 0.0001). BRCA1 promoter methylation level has a statistically significance on survival in BC patients (HazR = 1.465, P = 0.000) and is an independent prognostic factor for OS in BC patients (HazR = 2.042, P = 0.000). Patients with ductal type, HER2 negative, lymph node negative stage 1+2 tumors had a better OS and DFS. Classification of grades and molecular subtypes did not show any prognostic significance. Pyrosequencing is a precise and efficient method to quantify BRCA1 promoter methylation level, with a high potential for future clinical implication, as it identifies subgroups of patients with poorer prognosis.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported increased risk of breast cancer associated with early life exposure to two measures of air pollution exposure, total suspended particulates (TSP) and traffic emissions (TE), possible proxies for exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Exposure to PAHs has been shown to be associated with aberrant patterns of DNA methylation in peripheral blood of healthy individuals. Exposure to PAHs and methylation in breast tumor tissue has received little attention. We examined the association of early life exposure to TSP and TE with patterns of DNA methylation in breast tumors. METHODS: We conducted a study of women enrolled in the Western New York Exposures and Breast Cancer (WEB) Study. Methylation of nine genes (SFN, SCGB3A1, RARB, GSTP1, CDKN2A CCND2, BRCA1, FHIT, and SYK) was assessed using bisulfite-based pyrosequencing. TSP exposure at each woman's home address at birth, menarche, and when she had her first child was estimated. TE exposure was modeled for each woman's residence at menarche, her first birth, and twenty and ten years prior to diagnosis. Unconditional logistic regression was employed to estimate odds ratios (OR) of having methylation greater than the median value, adjusting for age, secondhand smoke exposure before age 20, current smoking status, and estrogen receptor status. RESULTS: Exposure to higher TSP at a woman's first birth was associated with lower methylation of SCGB3A1 (OR = 0.48, 95% CI: 0.23-0.99) and higher methylation of SYK (OR = 1.86, 95% CI: 1.03-3.35). TE at menarche was associated with increased methylation of SYK (OR = 2.37, 95% CI: 1.05-5.33). TE at first birth and ten years prior to diagnosis was associated with decreased methylation of CCND2 (OR ten years prior to diagnosis=0.48, 95% CI: 0.26-0.89). Although these associations were nominally significant, none were significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons (p < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: We observed suggestive evidence that exposure to ambient air pollution throughout life, measured as TSP and TE, may be associated with DNA methylation of some tumor suppressor genes in breast tumor tissue. Future studies with a larger sample size that assess methylation of more sites are warranted.. BACKGROUND: We previously reported increased risk of breast cancer associated with early life exposure to two measures of air pollution exposure, total suspended particulates (TSP) and traffic emissions (TE), possible proxies for exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Exposure to PAHs has been shown to be associated with aberrant patterns of DNA methylation in peripheral blood of healthy individuals. Exposure to PAHs and methylation in breast tumor tissue has received little attention. We examined the association of early life exposure to TSP and TE with patterns of DNA methylation in breast tumors. METHODS: We conducted a study of women enrolled in the Western New York Exposures and Breast Cancer (WEB) Study. Methylation of nine genes (SFN, SCGB3A1, RARB, GSTP1, CDKN2A CCND2, BRCA1, FHIT, and SYK) was assessed using bisulfite-based pyrosequencing. TSP exposure at each woman's home address at birth, menarche, and when she had her first child was estimated. TE exposure was modeled for each woman's residence at menarche, her first birth, and twenty and ten years prior to diagnosis. Unconditional logistic regression was employed to estimate odds ratios (OR) of having methylation greater than the median value, adjusting for age, secondhand smoke exposure before age 20, current smoking status, and estrogen receptor status. RESULTS: Exposure to higher TSP at a woman's first birth was associated with lower methylation of SCGB3A1 (OR = 0.48, 95% CI: 0.23-0.99) and higher methylation of SYK (OR = 1.86, 95% CI: 1.03-3.35). TE at menarche was associated with increased methylation of SYK (OR = 2.37, 95% CI: 1.05-5.33). TE at first birth and ten years prior to diagnosis was associated with decreased methylation of CCND2 (OR ten years prior to diagnosis=0.48, 95% CI: 0.26-0.89). Although these associations were nominally significant, none were significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons (p < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: We observed suggestive evidence that exposure to ambient air pollution throughout life, measured as TSP and TE, may be associated with DNA methylation of some tumor suppressor genes in breast tumor tissue. Future studies with a larger sample size that assess methylation of more sites are warranted.

PURPOSE: Tobacco smoke exposure has been associated with altered DNA methylation. However, there is a paucity of information regarding tobacco smoke exposure and DNA methylation of breast tumors. METHODS: We conducted a case-only analysis using breast tumor tissue from 493 postmenopausal and 225 premenopausal cases in the Western New York Exposures and Breast Cancer (WEB) study. Methylation of nine genes (SFN, SCGB3A1, RARB, GSTP1, CDKN2A, CCND2, BRCA1, FHIT, and SYK) was measured with pyrosequencing. Participants reported their secondhand smoke (SHS) and active smoking exposure for seven time periods. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) of having methylation higher than the median. RESULTS: SHS exposure was associated with tumor DNA methylation among postmenopausal but not premenopausal women. Active smoking at certain ages was associated with increased methylation of GSTP1, FHIT, and CDKN2A and decreased methylation of SCGB3A1 and BRCA1 among both pre- and postmenopausal women. CONCLUSION: Exposure to tobacco smoke may contribute to breast carcinogenesis via alterations in DNA methylation. Further studies in a larger panel of genes are warranted.. PURPOSE: Tobacco smoke exposure has been associated with altered DNA methylation. However, there is a paucity of information regarding tobacco smoke exposure and DNA methylation of breast tumors. METHODS: We conducted a case-only analysis using breast tumor tissue from 493 postmenopausal and 225 premenopausal cases in the Western New York Exposures and Breast Cancer (WEB) study. Methylation of nine genes (SFN, SCGB3A1, RARB, GSTP1, CDKN2A, CCND2, BRCA1, FHIT, and SYK) was measured with pyrosequencing. Participants reported their secondhand smoke (SHS) and active smoking exposure for seven time periods. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) of having methylation higher than the median. RESULTS: SHS exposure was associated with tumor DNA methylation among postmenopausal but not premenopausal women. Active smoking at certain ages was associated with increased methylation of GSTP1, FHIT, and CDKN2A and decreased methylation of SCGB3A1 and BRCA1 among both pre- and postmenopausal women. CONCLUSION: Exposure to tobacco smoke may contribute to breast carcinogenesis via alterations in DNA methylation. Further studies in a larger panel of genes are warranted.

We evaluated the association between methylation of 9 genes, SCGB3A1, GSTP1, RARB, SYK, FHIT, CDKN2A, CCND2, BRCA1, and SFN in tumor samples from 720 breast cancer cases with clinicopathological features of the tumors and survival. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) of methylation and Cox proportional hazards models to estimate hazard ratios (HR) between methylation and breast cancer related mortality. Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) positivity were associated with increased SCGB3A1 methylation among pre- and post-menopausal cases. Among premenopausal women, compared with Stage 0 cases, cases of invasive cancer were more likely to have increased methylation of RARB (Stage I OR = 4.7, 95% CI: 1.1-19.0; Stage IIA/IIB OR = 9.7, 95% CI: 2.4-39.9; Stage III/IV OR = 5.6, 95% CI: 1.1-29.4) and lower methylation of FHIT (Stage I OR = 0.2, 95% CI: 0.1-0.9; Stage IIA/IIB OR = 0.2, 95% CI: 0.1-0.8; Stage III/IV OR = 0.6, 95% CI: 0.1-3.4). Among postmenopausal women, methylation of SYK was associated with increased tumor size (OR = 1.7, 95% CI: 1.0-2.7) and higher nuclear grade (OR = 2.0, 95% CI 1.2-3.6). Associations between methylation and breast cancer related mortality were observed among pre- but not post-menopausal women. Methylation of SCGB3A1 was associated with reduced risk of death from breast cancer (HR = 0.41, 95% CI: 0.17-0.99) as was BRCA1 (HR = 0.41, 95% CI: 0.16-0.97). CCND2 methylation was associated with increased risk of breast cancer mortality (HR = 3.4, 95% CI: 1.1-10.5). We observed differences in methylation associated with tumor characteristics; methylation of these genes was also associated with breast cancer survival among premenopausal cases. Understanding of the associations of DNA methylation with other clinicopathological features may have implications for prevention and treatment.. We evaluated the association between methylation of 9 genes, SCGB3A1, GSTP1, RARB, SYK, FHIT, CDKN2A, CCND2, BRCA1, and SFN in tumor samples from 720 breast cancer cases with clinicopathological features of the tumors and survival. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) of methylation and Cox proportional hazards models to estimate hazard ratios (HR) between methylation and breast cancer related mortality. Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) positivity were associated with increased SCGB3A1 methylation among pre- and post-menopausal cases. Among premenopausal women, compared with Stage 0 cases, cases of invasive cancer were more likely to have increased methylation of RARB (Stage I OR = 4.7, 95% CI: 1.1-19.0; Stage IIA/IIB OR = 9.7, 95% CI: 2.4-39.9; Stage III/IV OR = 5.6, 95% CI: 1.1-29.4) and lower methylation of FHIT (Stage I OR = 0.2, 95% CI: 0.1-0.9; Stage IIA/IIB OR = 0.2, 95% CI: 0.1-0.8; Stage III/IV OR = 0.6, 95% CI: 0.1-3.4). Among postmenopausal women, methylation of SYK was associated with increased tumor size (OR = 1.7, 95% CI: 1.0-2.7) and higher nuclear grade (OR = 2.0, 95% CI 1.2-3.6). Associations between methylation and breast cancer related mortality were observed among pre- but not post-menopausal women. Methylation of SCGB3A1 was associated with reduced risk of death from breast cancer (HR = 0.41, 95% CI: 0.17-0.99) as was BRCA1 (HR = 0.41, 95% CI: 0.16-0.97). CCND2 methylation was associated with increased risk of breast cancer mortality (HR = 3.4, 95% CI: 1.1-10.5). We observed differences in methylation associated with tumor characteristics; methylation of these genes was also associated with breast cancer survival among premenopausal cases. Understanding of the associations of DNA methylation with other clinicopathological features may have implications for prevention and treatment.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells evolve and constitute heterogeneous populations that fluctuate in space and time and are subjected to selection generating intratumor heterogeneity. This phenomenon is determined by the acquisition of genetic/epigenetic alterations and their selection over time which has clinical implications on drug resistance. METHODS: DNA extracted from different tumor cell populations (breast carcinomas, cancer cell lines and cellular clones) were analyzed by MS-MLPA. Methylation profiles were used to generate a heterogeneity index to quantify the magnitude of epigenetic heterogeneity in these populations. Cellular clones were obtained from single cells derived of MDA-MB 231 cancer cell lines applying serial limiting dilution method and morphology was analyzed by optical microscopy and flow cytometry. Clones characteristics were examined through cellular proliferation, migration capacity and apoptosis. Heterogeneity index was also calculated from beta values derived from methylation profiles of TCGA tumors. RESULTS: The study of methylation profiles of 23 fresh breast carcinomas revealed heterogeneous allele populations in these tumor pieces. With the purpose to measure the magnitude of epigenetic heterogeneity, we developed an heterogeneity index based on methylation information and observed that all tumors present their own heterogeneity level. Applying the index calculation in pure cancer cell populations such as cancer cell lines (MDA-MB 231, MCF-7, T47D, HeLa and K-562), we also observed epigenetic heterogeneity. In addition, we detected that clones obtained from the MDA-MB 231 cancer cell line generated their own new heterogeneity over time. Using TCGA tumors, we determined that the heterogeneity index correlated with prognostic and predictive factors like tumor size (p = 0.0088), number of affected axillary nodes (p = 0.007), estrogen receptor expression (p < 0.0001) and HER2 positivity (p = 0.0007). When we analyzed molecular subtypes we found that they presented different heterogeneity levels. Interestingly, we also observed that all mentioned tumor cell populations shared a similar Heterogeneity index (HI) mean. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that each tumor presents a unique epigenetic heterogeneity level, which is associated with prognostic and predictive factors. We also observe that breast tumor subtypes differ in terms of epigenetic heterogeneity, which could serve as a new contribution to understand the different prognosis of these groups.. BACKGROUND: Cancer cells evolve and constitute heterogeneous populations that fluctuate in space and time and are subjected to selection generating intratumor heterogeneity. This phenomenon is determined by the acquisition of genetic/epigenetic alterations and their selection over time which has clinical implications on drug resistance. METHODS: DNA extracted from different tumor cell populations (breast carcinomas, cancer cell lines and cellular clones) were analyzed by MS-MLPA. Methylation profiles were used to generate a heterogeneity index to quantify the magnitude of epigenetic heterogeneity in these populations. Cellular clones were obtained from single cells derived of MDA-MB 231 cancer cell lines applying serial limiting dilution method and morphology was analyzed by optical microscopy and flow cytometry. Clones characteristics were examined through cellular proliferation, migration capacity and apoptosis. Heterogeneity index was also calculated from beta values derived from methylation profiles of TCGA tumors. RESULTS: The study of methylation profiles of 23 fresh breast carcinomas revealed heterogeneous allele populations in these tumor pieces. With the purpose to measure the magnitude of epigenetic heterogeneity, we developed an heterogeneity index based on methylation information and observed that all tumors present their own heterogeneity level. Applying the index calculation in pure cancer cell populations such as cancer cell lines (MDA-MB 231, MCF-7, T47D, HeLa and K-562), we also observed epigenetic heterogeneity. In addition, we detected that clones obtained from the MDA-MB 231 cancer cell line generated their own new heterogeneity over time. Using TCGA tumors, we determined that the heterogeneity index correlated with prognostic and predictive factors like tumor size (p = 0.0088), number of affected axillary nodes (p = 0.007), estrogen receptor expression (p < 0.0001) and HER2 positivity (p = 0.0007). When we analyzed molecular subtypes we found that they presented different heterogeneity levels. Interestingly, we also observed that all mentioned tumor cell populations shared a similar Heterogeneity index (HI) mean. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that each tumor presents a unique epigenetic heterogeneity level, which is associated with prognostic and predictive factors. We also observe that breast tumor subtypes differ in terms of epigenetic heterogeneity, which could serve as a new contribution to understand the different prognosis of these groups.

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer among women and has high mortality rates. Early detection is supposed to be critical for the patient's prognosis. In recent years, several studies have investigated global DNA methylation profiles and gene-specific DNA methylation in blood-based DNA to develop putative screening markers for cancer. However, most of the studies have not yet been validated. In our study, we analyzed the promoter methylation of RASSF1A and ATM in peripheral blood DNA of 229 sporadic patients and 151 healthy controls by the MassARRAY EpiTYPER assay. There were no significant differences in DNA methylation levels of RASSF1A and ATM between the sporadic BC cases and the healthy controls. Furthermore, we performed the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (450K) array analysis using 48 sporadic BC cases and 48 healthy controls (cases and controls are the same from those of the MassARRAY EpiTYPER assay) and made a comparison with the published data. No significant differences were presented in DNA methylation levels of RASSF1A and ATM between the sporadic BC cases and the healthy controls. So far, the evidence for powerful blood-based methylation markers is still limited and the identified markers need to be further validated.. Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer among women and has high mortality rates. Early detection is supposed to be critical for the patient's prognosis. In recent years, several studies have investigated global DNA methylation profiles and gene-specific DNA methylation in blood-based DNA to develop putative screening markers for cancer. However, most of the studies have not yet been validated. In our study, we analyzed the promoter methylation of RASSF1A and ATM in peripheral blood DNA of 229 sporadic patients and 151 healthy controls by the MassARRAY EpiTYPER assay. There were no significant differences in DNA methylation levels of RASSF1A and ATM between the sporadic BC cases and the healthy controls. Furthermore, we performed the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (450K) array analysis using 48 sporadic BC cases and 48 healthy controls (cases and controls are the same from those of the MassARRAY EpiTYPER assay) and made a comparison with the published data. No significant differences were presented in DNA methylation levels of RASSF1A and ATM between the sporadic BC cases and the healthy controls. So far, the evidence for powerful blood-based methylation markers is still limited and the identified markers need to be further validated.

Reduced expression of BRCA1 has been reported in sporadic breast cancer, although the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon remain unclear. Abnormal methylation leading to silencing of tumour suppressor genes has been implicated in tumorigenesis in a wide range of sporadic cancers. Therefore, we sought to determine the frequency of methylation within the BRCA1 promoter region in a large group of sporadic invasive breast (n =96) and ovarian (n = 43) carcinomas using Southern analyses. Overall, methylation was detected in 11% of breast cancer cases and in 5% of ovarian tumours. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region was strongly correlated with lack of estrogen and progesterone receptor expression. It is clear from the frequency of abnormal methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region, that this cannot be the sole mechanism mediating the reduced expression of BRCA1 that has previously been reported to occur in the majority of invasive sporadic breast tumours. Nevertheless this study suggests that abnormal methylation of the BRCA1 promoter may be important in tumorigenesis in a subset of sporadic breast and ovarian cancers.. Reduced expression of BRCA1 has been reported in sporadic breast cancer, although the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon remain unclear. Abnormal methylation leading to silencing of tumour suppressor genes has been implicated in tumorigenesis in a wide range of sporadic cancers. Therefore, we sought to determine the frequency of methylation within the BRCA1 promoter region in a large group of sporadic invasive breast (n =96) and ovarian (n = 43) carcinomas using Southern analyses. Overall, methylation was detected in 11% of breast cancer cases and in 5% of ovarian tumours. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region was strongly correlated with lack of estrogen and progesterone receptor expression. It is clear from the frequency of abnormal methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region, that this cannot be the sole mechanism mediating the reduced expression of BRCA1 that has previously been reported to occur in the majority of invasive sporadic breast tumours. Nevertheless this study suggests that abnormal methylation of the BRCA1 promoter may be important in tumorigenesis in a subset of sporadic breast and ovarian cancers.

We studied the promoter methylation status and expression levels of P16 and CDH1 genes in breast cancer and their adjacent normal tissues with normal control breast tissues, to correlate with their histopathological parameters. Hundred twenty four samples (tumor and adjacent nonmalignant tissues) from 62 breast cancer patients and 4 normal control breast tissues were included in the study. We used methylation specific PCR to evaluate methylation status and quantitative RT-PCR to measure the gene expression levels. Methylation incidence of P16 gene and CDH1 gene in tumor tissues were 24.2 % and 33.9 %, respectively. CDH1 and P16 gene were not methylated in normal control tissues. CDH1 underexpression is found to be significant in correlation with advanced stage, histologic type, high tumor grade and lymph node involvement. P16 expression is found not to be significantly related with any histopathological parameters. But 60% of cases which overexpresses P16 were estrogen negative, and 40% of them were histologic grade 3. Both P16 and CDH1 had different expression levels in tumor tissues compared to the adjacent normal tissues and in adjacent normal tissues compared to the normal non-tumor tissues.. We studied the promoter methylation status and expression levels of P16 and CDH1 genes in breast cancer and their adjacent normal tissues with normal control breast tissues, to correlate with their histopathological parameters. Hundred twenty four samples (tumor and adjacent nonmalignant tissues) from 62 breast cancer patients and 4 normal control breast tissues were included in the study. We used methylation specific PCR to evaluate methylation status and quantitative RT-PCR to measure the gene expression levels. Methylation incidence of P16 gene and CDH1 gene in tumor tissues were 24.2 % and 33.9 %, respectively. CDH1 and P16 gene were not methylated in normal control tissues. CDH1 underexpression is found to be significant in correlation with advanced stage, histologic type, high tumor grade and lymph node involvement. P16 expression is found not to be significantly related with any histopathological parameters. But 60% of cases which overexpresses P16 were estrogen negative, and 40% of them were histologic grade 3. Both P16 and CDH1 had different expression levels in tumor tissues compared to the adjacent normal tissues and in adjacent normal tissues compared to the normal non-tumor tissues.

The purpose of this study is to investigate whether BRCA1 promoter methylation is associated with poorer outcome in sporadic breast cancer cases treated with tamoxifen. BRCA1 promoter methylation was determined by bisulfite pyrosequencing in two groups of sporadic breast cancer patients, systemically untreated (N = 497) and treated with adjuvant tamoxifen (N = 497). Associations of BRCA1 promoter methylation with clinopathological characteristics and the effect of BRCA1 promoter methylation on time to first recurrence (TTR) and overall survival (OS) were examined. No significant differences were observed between BRCA1 promoter methylation and clinopathological characteristics in untreated and tamoxifen-treated groups. Cut point analysis did not find any promising cut point for BRCA1 promoter methylation that would differentially influence TTR and OS in untreated and tamoxifen-treated group. Using the median (2.53 %) and an arbitrary value of 10 % as a cut point for methylation, we still found no significant effect of BRCA1 promoter methylation on TTR and OS in untreated and tamoxifen-treated group. Despite data suggesting that BRCA1 levels impact estrogen receptor response to tamoxifen, our results indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation is not associated with poorer outcome in sporadic breast cancer cases treated with tamoxifen.. The purpose of this study is to investigate whether BRCA1 promoter methylation is associated with poorer outcome in sporadic breast cancer cases treated with tamoxifen. BRCA1 promoter methylation was determined by bisulfite pyrosequencing in two groups of sporadic breast cancer patients, systemically untreated (N = 497) and treated with adjuvant tamoxifen (N = 497). Associations of BRCA1 promoter methylation with clinopathological characteristics and the effect of BRCA1 promoter methylation on time to first recurrence (TTR) and overall survival (OS) were examined. No significant differences were observed between BRCA1 promoter methylation and clinopathological characteristics in untreated and tamoxifen-treated groups. Cut point analysis did not find any promising cut point for BRCA1 promoter methylation that would differentially influence TTR and OS in untreated and tamoxifen-treated group. Using the median (2.53 %) and an arbitrary value of 10 % as a cut point for methylation, we still found no significant effect of BRCA1 promoter methylation on TTR and OS in untreated and tamoxifen-treated group. Despite data suggesting that BRCA1 levels impact estrogen receptor response to tamoxifen, our results indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation is not associated with poorer outcome in sporadic breast cancer cases treated with tamoxifen.

We aimed to investigate the expression of methylation-related proteins (5-meC and DNMT1) in the metastatic breast cancers of variable sites and its association with clinicopathologic factors. A total of 126 metastatic breast cancers (31 bone metastases, 36 brain metastases, 11 liver metastases, 48 lung metastases) were made into tissue microarray and immunohistochemical staining of ER, PR, HER-2, Ki-67, 5-meC, and DNMT1 were performed. Molecular classification was made on the basis of immunohistochemical staining result of ER, PR, HER-2, Ki-67; luminal A, luminal B, HER-2, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). Methylation-related proteins were differentially expressed based on the metastatic sites. Tumoral and stromal 5-meC showed the lowest expression in the bone metastasis (P < 0.001), tumoral DNMT1 showed the least expression in bone metastasis and the highest expression in the brain metastasis (P < 0.001). Expression of DNMT1 was correlated with ER negativity (P = 0.004), PR negativity (P = 0.011), HER-2 positivity (P = 0.016), higher Ki-67 labeling indices (P = 0.016), and non-luminal A type (P = 0.017). DNMT1 positivity was associated with shorter overall survival in bone metastasis (P = 0.017) and lung metastasis (P = 0.028) by univariate analysis. In conclusion, methylation-related proteins differentially expressed according to the metastatic sites in metastatic breast cancer. Tumoral and stromal 5-meC showed the lowest expression in the bone metastasis. Tumoral DNMT1 expression was low in bone metastasis and highest in brain metastasis.. We aimed to investigate the expression of methylation-related proteins (5-meC and DNMT1) in the metastatic breast cancers of variable sites and its association with clinicopathologic factors. A total of 126 metastatic breast cancers (31 bone metastases, 36 brain metastases, 11 liver metastases, 48 lung metastases) were made into tissue microarray and immunohistochemical staining of ER, PR, HER-2, Ki-67, 5-meC, and DNMT1 were performed. Molecular classification was made on the basis of immunohistochemical staining result of ER, PR, HER-2, Ki-67; luminal A, luminal B, HER-2, triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). Methylation-related proteins were differentially expressed based on the metastatic sites. Tumoral and stromal 5-meC showed the lowest expression in the bone metastasis (P < 0.001), tumoral DNMT1 showed the least expression in bone metastasis and the highest expression in the brain metastasis (P < 0.001). Expression of DNMT1 was correlated with ER negativity (P = 0.004), PR negativity (P = 0.011), HER-2 positivity (P = 0.016), higher Ki-67 labeling indices (P = 0.016), and non-luminal A type (P = 0.017). DNMT1 positivity was associated with shorter overall survival in bone metastasis (P = 0.017) and lung metastasis (P = 0.028) by univariate analysis. In conclusion, methylation-related proteins differentially expressed according to the metastatic sites in metastatic breast cancer. Tumoral and stromal 5-meC showed the lowest expression in the bone metastasis. Tumoral DNMT1 expression was low in bone metastasis and highest in brain metastasis.

PURPOSE: We aimed to compare the expression of DNA methylation-related proteins in invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) of breast with those of invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) of breast and to assess its potential clinical application. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining of DNS methylation-related proteins (5-meC, DNMT1, DNMT3B and ISL-1) was applied to tissue microarrays generated from 108 ILCs and 203 IDCs. Protein expression and its correlation with clinicopatholgic variables were statistically analyzed. RESULTS: ISL-1 and DNMT3B were highly expressed in ILC (p<0.001) and tumoral 5-meC was highly expressed in IDC (p=0.006). DNMT1 (p<0.001) showed higher expression rate in luminal A type ILC. ISL-1 and DNMT3B showed higher expression rate in both luminal A type and luminal B type of ILC (p<0.05). In IDC, tumoral 5-meC commonly showed high positive (p=0.039). On univariate analysis, shorter disease free survival of ILC was associated with DNMT1 high positivity (p=0.001) and ISL-1 positivity (p=0.018). CONCLUSION: DNA methylation-related proteins are differentially expressed in ILC and IDC, and DNMT1, DNMT3B and ISL-1 show high expression rate in ILC.. PURPOSE: We aimed to compare the expression of DNA methylation-related proteins in invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) of breast with those of invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) of breast and to assess its potential clinical application. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining of DNS methylation-related proteins (5-meC, DNMT1, DNMT3B and ISL-1) was applied to tissue microarrays generated from 108 ILCs and 203 IDCs. Protein expression and its correlation with clinicopatholgic variables were statistically analyzed. RESULTS: ISL-1 and DNMT3B were highly expressed in ILC (p<0.001) and tumoral 5-meC was highly expressed in IDC (p=0.006). DNMT1 (p<0.001) showed higher expression rate in luminal A type ILC. ISL-1 and DNMT3B showed higher expression rate in both luminal A type and luminal B type of ILC (p<0.05). In IDC, tumoral 5-meC commonly showed high positive (p=0.039). On univariate analysis, shorter disease free survival of ILC was associated with DNMT1 high positivity (p=0.001) and ISL-1 positivity (p=0.018). CONCLUSION: DNA methylation-related proteins are differentially expressed in ILC and IDC, and DNMT1, DNMT3B and ISL-1 show high expression rate in ILC.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation, are key regulators of gene activity in tumorigenesis. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, and large-scale analyses indicate that tumor from normal and benign tissues, as well as molecular subtypes of breast cancer, can be distinguished based on their distinct genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic profiles. In this study, we used affinity-based methylation sequencing data in 30 breast cancer cell lines representing functionally distinct cancer subtypes to investigate methylation and mutation patterns at the whole genome level. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed significant differences in CpG island (CpGI) shore methylation and mutation patterns among breast cancer subtypes. In particular, the basal-like B type, a highly aggressive form of the disease, displayed distinct CpGI shore hypomethylation patterns that were significantly associated with downstream gene regulation. We determined that mutation rates at CpG sites were highly correlated with DNA methylation status and observed distinct mutation rates among the breast cancer subtypes. These findings were validated by using targeted bisulfite sequencing of differentially expressed genes (n=85) among the cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that alterations in DNA methylation play critical roles in gene regulatory process as well as cytosine substitution rates at CpG sites in molecular subtypes of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation, are key regulators of gene activity in tumorigenesis. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, and large-scale analyses indicate that tumor from normal and benign tissues, as well as molecular subtypes of breast cancer, can be distinguished based on their distinct genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic profiles. In this study, we used affinity-based methylation sequencing data in 30 breast cancer cell lines representing functionally distinct cancer subtypes to investigate methylation and mutation patterns at the whole genome level. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed significant differences in CpG island (CpGI) shore methylation and mutation patterns among breast cancer subtypes. In particular, the basal-like B type, a highly aggressive form of the disease, displayed distinct CpGI shore hypomethylation patterns that were significantly associated with downstream gene regulation. We determined that mutation rates at CpG sites were highly correlated with DNA methylation status and observed distinct mutation rates among the breast cancer subtypes. These findings were validated by using targeted bisulfite sequencing of differentially expressed genes (n=85) among the cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that alterations in DNA methylation play critical roles in gene regulatory process as well as cytosine substitution rates at CpG sites in molecular subtypes of breast cancer.

No reports have examined the association between tamoxifen resistance and the methylation of the estrogen receptor (ER) alpha and beta genes. Therefore we investigated the methylation patterns of the ER genes in the tamoxifen-resistant tumors. We used bisulfite genomic sequencing and reverse transcriptase PCR to determine the methylation patterns and mRNA expression of the two ER genes from control (n = 68) and tamoxifen-resistant tissues (n = 34) chosen by an age-matched sampling method. Bisulfite genomic sequencing allowed us to reveal the methylation of the ER alpha gene in 15 of the control tumors (22.1%) and in 11 tumors of the resistant group (32.4%). The methylation of ER beta was observed in 40 control tumors (58.8%) and in 8 recurrent tumors (23.5%). The methylation rate of the ER beta but not the ER alpha in the control group was significantly higher than in its counterpart (ER alpha, P = 0.261; ER beta, P = 0.001). Among the methylated tumors mean methylation density of ER alpha and ER beta in the resistant cases was significantly elevated (ER alpha, P = 0.014; ER beta, P < 0.001). Furthermore, the expression rate of ER beta mRNA was higher among the tumor in the resistant group than in the control with marginal significance (77.8% vs. 38.1%, P = 0.109). Additionally, in the cancers from the resistant cases, the cells showed a higher percentage of positive staining for Ki67 than those from the control group (P = 0.001). Our study indicates that there is an inverse relationship between the methylation rate of the ER beta gene and tamoxifen resistance. The tamoxifen-resistant tumors showed more dense methylation of the ER beta gene than control tumors. Although the number of case samples was limited, our results support the hypothesis that hypermethylation of the ER beta gene negatively affects the development of tamoxifen resistance.. No reports have examined the association between tamoxifen resistance and the methylation of the estrogen receptor (ER) alpha and beta genes. Therefore we investigated the methylation patterns of the ER genes in the tamoxifen-resistant tumors. We used bisulfite genomic sequencing and reverse transcriptase PCR to determine the methylation patterns and mRNA expression of the two ER genes from control (n = 68) and tamoxifen-resistant tissues (n = 34) chosen by an age-matched sampling method. Bisulfite genomic sequencing allowed us to reveal the methylation of the ER alpha gene in 15 of the control tumors (22.1%) and in 11 tumors of the resistant group (32.4%). The methylation of ER beta was observed in 40 control tumors (58.8%) and in 8 recurrent tumors (23.5%). The methylation rate of the ER beta but not the ER alpha in the control group was significantly higher than in its counterpart (ER alpha, P = 0.261; ER beta, P = 0.001). Among the methylated tumors mean methylation density of ER alpha and ER beta in the resistant cases was significantly elevated (ER alpha, P = 0.014; ER beta, P < 0.001). Furthermore, the expression rate of ER beta mRNA was higher among the tumor in the resistant group than in the control with marginal significance (77.8% vs. 38.1%, P = 0.109). Additionally, in the cancers from the resistant cases, the cells showed a higher percentage of positive staining for Ki67 than those from the control group (P = 0.001). Our study indicates that there is an inverse relationship between the methylation rate of the ER beta gene and tamoxifen resistance. The tamoxifen-resistant tumors showed more dense methylation of the ER beta gene than control tumors. Although the number of case samples was limited, our results support the hypothesis that hypermethylation of the ER beta gene negatively affects the development of tamoxifen resistance.

Methylations in estrogen receptor (ER) alpha and ERbeta are known to be involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Here, we explore the role of promoter methylation of estrogen receptors, ERalpha and ERbeta, in sporadic breast cancer cases from a North Indian population. To this end, association between ERalpha and ERbeta methylation status along with different clinicopathological parameters and its correlation with protein expression was examined. Four hundred eighty paired breast cancer tissue samples and adjacent normal controls from 240 sporadic breast cancer patients were included, and their clinical and demographic profiles were recorded. ERalpha and ERbeta methylation was determined by methylation-specific polymerase (MSP) chain reaction. Our findings demonstrate that methylation of ERalpha and ERbeta occurs in high frequency and appears to be a mechanism of gene silencing in our population. Furthermore, on performing stratified analysis, we observed strong associations between ERalpha/ERbeta methylation and ER, PR, and HER2 status, tumor size, clinical stage, and triple negative tumors. Thus, our study not only highlights the role of ERalpha/ERbeta methylation in breast cancer but also suggests the ERalpha/ERbeta methylation pattern as a biomarker for assessing breast cancer risk.. Methylations in estrogen receptor (ER) alpha and ERbeta are known to be involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Here, we explore the role of promoter methylation of estrogen receptors, ERalpha and ERbeta, in sporadic breast cancer cases from a North Indian population. To this end, association between ERalpha and ERbeta methylation status along with different clinicopathological parameters and its correlation with protein expression was examined. Four hundred eighty paired breast cancer tissue samples and adjacent normal controls from 240 sporadic breast cancer patients were included, and their clinical and demographic profiles were recorded. ERalpha and ERbeta methylation was determined by methylation-specific polymerase (MSP) chain reaction. Our findings demonstrate that methylation of ERalpha and ERbeta occurs in high frequency and appears to be a mechanism of gene silencing in our population. Furthermore, on performing stratified analysis, we observed strong associations between ERalpha/ERbeta methylation and ER, PR, and HER2 status, tumor size, clinical stage, and triple negative tumors. Thus, our study not only highlights the role of ERalpha/ERbeta methylation in breast cancer but also suggests the ERalpha/ERbeta methylation pattern as a biomarker for assessing breast cancer risk.

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphatase- 1 (MKP-1) belongs to the MAPK cascades which are central to cell proliferation and apoptosis. The carcinogenic role of MKP-1 has been reported in many types of cancer but it has rarely been investigated in breast cancer. The present study was designed to evaluate the MKP-1 mRNA expression and its possible regulation by methylation of MKP-1 promoter in the model of several breast cancer cell lines and tissues as well as controls. Our data demonstrate MKP-1 mRNA expression significantly decreased in five breast cancer cell lines compared to breast controls (P<0.01). Using the methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis, the unmethylated reaction (U) is dominant in both normal cell lines and benign breast tumors (100% vs. 86.2%), whereas the methylated reaction (M) is dominant in both breast cancer cell lines and invasive breast tumors (100% vs. 57.2%). In terms of methylation ratio (M/M+U), methylation level in MKP-1 promoter is significantly higher in the invasive breast tumor tissues (n = 152) than in benign breast tumor tissues (n = 29) (P<0.0001). Assessing the methylation ratio of the promoter of MKP-1 gene to diagnose the breast malignancy (invasive vs. benign), the area under the receiver- operating characteristic (ROC) curve was 0.809 (95% CI: 0.711-0.906, P<0.001). The best performance for this prediction has a sensitivity of 76.32% and a specificity of 82.76% at the cutoff value of 0.38. Taken together, we firstly demonstrated that the promoter methylation of MKP-1 gene is a potential breast cancer biomarker for breast malignancy.. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phosphatase- 1 (MKP-1) belongs to the MAPK cascades which are central to cell proliferation and apoptosis. The carcinogenic role of MKP-1 has been reported in many types of cancer but it has rarely been investigated in breast cancer. The present study was designed to evaluate the MKP-1 mRNA expression and its possible regulation by methylation of MKP-1 promoter in the model of several breast cancer cell lines and tissues as well as controls. Our data demonstrate MKP-1 mRNA expression significantly decreased in five breast cancer cell lines compared to breast controls (P<0.01). Using the methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis, the unmethylated reaction (U) is dominant in both normal cell lines and benign breast tumors (100% vs. 86.2%), whereas the methylated reaction (M) is dominant in both breast cancer cell lines and invasive breast tumors (100% vs. 57.2%). In terms of methylation ratio (M/M+U), methylation level in MKP-1 promoter is significantly higher in the invasive breast tumor tissues (n = 152) than in benign breast tumor tissues (n = 29) (P<0.0001). Assessing the methylation ratio of the promoter of MKP-1 gene to diagnose the breast malignancy (invasive vs. benign), the area under the receiver- operating characteristic (ROC) curve was 0.809 (95% CI: 0.711-0.906, P<0.001). The best performance for this prediction has a sensitivity of 76.32% and a specificity of 82.76% at the cutoff value of 0.38. Taken together, we firstly demonstrated that the promoter methylation of MKP-1 gene is a potential breast cancer biomarker for breast malignancy.

PURPOSE: Understanding and explaining hereditary predisposition to cancer has focused on the genetic etiology of the disease. However, mutations in known genes associated with breast cancer, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, account for less than 25% of familial cases of breast cancer. Recently, specific epigenetic modifications at BRCA1 have been shown to promote hereditary breast cancer, but the broader potential for epigenetic contribution to hereditary breast cancer is not yet well understood. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined DNA methylation through deep bisulfite sequencing of CpG islands and known promoter or regulatory regions in peripheral blood DNA from 99 familial or early-onset breast or ovarian cancer patients, 6 unaffected BRCA-mutation carriers, and 49 unaffected controls. RESULTS: In 9% of patients, we observed altered methylation in the promoter regions of genes known to be involved in cancer including hypermethylation at the tumor suppressor PTEN and hypomethylation at the proto-oncogene TEX14 These alterations occur in the form of allelic methylation that span up to hundreds of base-pairs in length. CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest a broader role for DNA methylation in early-onset, familial risk breast cancer. Further studies are warranted to clarify these mechanisms and the benefits of DNA methylation screening for early risk prediction of familial cancers.. PURPOSE: Understanding and explaining hereditary predisposition to cancer has focused on the genetic etiology of the disease. However, mutations in known genes associated with breast cancer, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2, account for less than 25% of familial cases of breast cancer. Recently, specific epigenetic modifications at BRCA1 have been shown to promote hereditary breast cancer, but the broader potential for epigenetic contribution to hereditary breast cancer is not yet well understood. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined DNA methylation through deep bisulfite sequencing of CpG islands and known promoter or regulatory regions in peripheral blood DNA from 99 familial or early-onset breast or ovarian cancer patients, 6 unaffected BRCA-mutation carriers, and 49 unaffected controls. RESULTS: In 9% of patients, we observed altered methylation in the promoter regions of genes known to be involved in cancer including hypermethylation at the tumor suppressor PTEN and hypomethylation at the proto-oncogene TEX14 These alterations occur in the form of allelic methylation that span up to hundreds of base-pairs in length. CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest a broader role for DNA methylation in early-onset, familial risk breast cancer. Further studies are warranted to clarify these mechanisms and the benefits of DNA methylation screening for early risk prediction of familial cancers.

The coupling between DNA methylation and histone modification contributes to aberrant expression of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes that leads to tumor development. Our previous study demonstrated that lysine demethylase 2A (KDM2A) functions as an oncogene in breast cancer by promoting cancer stemness and angiogenesis via activation of the Notch signaling. Here, we demonstrate that knockdown of KDM2A significantly increases the 5'-hydroxymethylcytosine (5'-hmc) level in genomic DNA and expression of tet-eleven translocation 2 (TET2) in various breast cancer cell lines. Conversely, ectopic expression of KDM2A inhibits TET2 expression in KDM2A-depleted cells suggesting TET2 is a transcriptional repression target of KDM2A. Our results show that KDM2A interacts with RelA to co-occupy at the TET2 gene promoter to repress transcription and depletion of RelA or KDM2A restores TET2 expression. Upregulation of TET2 in the KDM2A-depleted cells induces the re-activation of two TET downstream tumor suppressor genes, epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and E-cadherin, and inhibits migration and invasion. On the contrary, knockdown of TET2 in these cells decreases EpCAM and E-cadherin and increases cell invasiveness. More importantly, TET2 expression is negatively associated KDM2A in triple-negative breast tumor tissues, and its expression predicts a better survival. Taken together, we demonstrate for the first time that TET2 is a direct repression target of KDM2A and reveal a novel mechanism by which KDM2A promotes DNA methylation and breast cancer progression via the inhibition of a DNA demethylase.. The coupling between DNA methylation and histone modification contributes to aberrant expression of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes that leads to tumor development. Our previous study demonstrated that lysine demethylase 2A (KDM2A) functions as an oncogene in breast cancer by promoting cancer stemness and angiogenesis via activation of the Notch signaling. Here, we demonstrate that knockdown of KDM2A significantly increases the 5'-hydroxymethylcytosine (5'-hmc) level in genomic DNA and expression of tet-eleven translocation 2 (TET2) in various breast cancer cell lines. Conversely, ectopic expression of KDM2A inhibits TET2 expression in KDM2A-depleted cells suggesting TET2 is a transcriptional repression target of KDM2A. Our results show that KDM2A interacts with RelA to co-occupy at the TET2 gene promoter to repress transcription and depletion of RelA or KDM2A restores TET2 expression. Upregulation of TET2 in the KDM2A-depleted cells induces the re-activation of two TET downstream tumor suppressor genes, epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and E-cadherin, and inhibits migration and invasion. On the contrary, knockdown of TET2 in these cells decreases EpCAM and E-cadherin and increases cell invasiveness. More importantly, TET2 expression is negatively associated KDM2A in triple-negative breast tumor tissues, and its expression predicts a better survival. Taken together, we demonstrate for the first time that TET2 is a direct repression target of KDM2A and reveal a novel mechanism by which KDM2A promotes DNA methylation and breast cancer progression via the inhibition of a DNA demethylase.

FEZ1/LZTS1 is a tumor suppressor gene located in chromosomal band 8p22, and methylation has been identified as a mechanism for its loss of function in tumors. Chromosomal deletion at 8p22 is also frequent in breast cancer. We therefore examined whether LZTS1 plays a role in breast cancer. We analyzed expression of LZTS1 at both the RNA and protein levels, and promoter methylation in a number of primary tumors and cell lines from breast cancer. We also examined the association between LZTS1 expression and different clinicopathological parameters of breast cancer. We found that the expression of LZTS1 mRNA was reduced in 25 of 50 (50%) primary tumors and 29 of 30 (97%) breast cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemical staining showed that LZTS1 protein was absent or down-regulated in 72 (72%) of 100 primary breast carcinomas. Reduced expression of LZTS1 at either the RNA or protein level was significantly correlated with lymph node metastases (P < 0.05). DNA methylation analysis revealed that the LZTS1 gene was frequently methylated in both cell lines and primary tumors from breast cancer, and the extent of DNA methylation was correlated with reduced expression of the gene. These findings suggest that LZTS1 plays a role in the development and progression of breast cancer at least through promoter methylation-mediated transcriptional downregulation.. FEZ1/LZTS1 is a tumor suppressor gene located in chromosomal band 8p22, and methylation has been identified as a mechanism for its loss of function in tumors. Chromosomal deletion at 8p22 is also frequent in breast cancer. We therefore examined whether LZTS1 plays a role in breast cancer. We analyzed expression of LZTS1 at both the RNA and protein levels, and promoter methylation in a number of primary tumors and cell lines from breast cancer. We also examined the association between LZTS1 expression and different clinicopathological parameters of breast cancer. We found that the expression of LZTS1 mRNA was reduced in 25 of 50 (50%) primary tumors and 29 of 30 (97%) breast cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemical staining showed that LZTS1 protein was absent or down-regulated in 72 (72%) of 100 primary breast carcinomas. Reduced expression of LZTS1 at either the RNA or protein level was significantly correlated with lymph node metastases (P < 0.05). DNA methylation analysis revealed that the LZTS1 gene was frequently methylated in both cell lines and primary tumors from breast cancer, and the extent of DNA methylation was correlated with reduced expression of the gene. These findings suggest that LZTS1 plays a role in the development and progression of breast cancer at least through promoter methylation-mediated transcriptional downregulation.

We have shown that prostasin serine protease is downregulated in high-grade prostate tumors and inhibits invasiveness of prostate cancer cell lines upon enforced reexpression. In our study, prostasin mRNA and protein were shown to be expressed in normal human mammary epithelial cells (NHMEC), the poorly invasive breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7 and the nonmetastatic breast carcinoma cell line MDA-MB-453, but absent in highly invasive and metastatic breast carcinoma cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435s. Enforced reexpression of prostasin in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435s reduced the in vitro invasiveness of either cell line by 50%. Examination of the prostasin gene promoter and first exon revealed a GC-enriched region that contains transcription regulatory elements. The promoter and exon 1 region of the prostasin gene was investigated for DNA methylation in NHMEC and the carcinoma cell lines. The results revealed a methylation pattern that correlates with prostasin expression in these cells. Demethylation coupled with histone deacetylase inhibition resulted in reactivated expression of the prostasin mRNA in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435s cells. These results suggest that prostasin expression in breast cancer cells may be regulated by DNA methylation and that an absence of prostasin expression may contribute to breast cancer invasiveness and metastatic potential.. We have shown that prostasin serine protease is downregulated in high-grade prostate tumors and inhibits invasiveness of prostate cancer cell lines upon enforced reexpression. In our study, prostasin mRNA and protein were shown to be expressed in normal human mammary epithelial cells (NHMEC), the poorly invasive breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7 and the nonmetastatic breast carcinoma cell line MDA-MB-453, but absent in highly invasive and metastatic breast carcinoma cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435s. Enforced reexpression of prostasin in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435s reduced the in vitro invasiveness of either cell line by 50%. Examination of the prostasin gene promoter and first exon revealed a GC-enriched region that contains transcription regulatory elements. The promoter and exon 1 region of the prostasin gene was investigated for DNA methylation in NHMEC and the carcinoma cell lines. The results revealed a methylation pattern that correlates with prostasin expression in these cells. Demethylation coupled with histone deacetylase inhibition resulted in reactivated expression of the prostasin mRNA in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435s cells. These results suggest that prostasin expression in breast cancer cells may be regulated by DNA methylation and that an absence of prostasin expression may contribute to breast cancer invasiveness and metastatic potential.

The role of the promoter methylation of O (6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) remains controversial for breast and gynecologic cancers. We conducted a meta-analysis to assess the association between hypermethylation of MGMT promoter and the risk of breast and gynecologic cancers. A comprehensive search was conducted in PubMed and Embase electronic databases up to 19th August 2017 for studies about the association between MGMT promoter hypermethylation and breast and gynecologic cancers. A total of 28 articles including 2,171 tumor tissues and 1,191 controls were involved in the meta-analysis. The pooled results showed that MGMT promoter methylation status was significantly associated with an increased risk of breast and gynecologic cancers (OR = 4.37, 95% CI: 2.68-7.13, P < 0.05). The associations were robust in subgroup analysis based on ethnicity, cancer type, methylation detection method, and control source. This meta-analysis indicated that MGMT hypermethylation was significantly associated with the risk of breast and gynecological cancers, and it may be utilized as a valuable biomarker in early diagnostics and prognostication of these cancers. Further efforts are needed to identify and validate this finding in prospective studies, especially in situation with new methylation testing methods and samples from plasma circulating DNA.. The role of the promoter methylation of O (6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) remains controversial for breast and gynecologic cancers. We conducted a meta-analysis to assess the association between hypermethylation of MGMT promoter and the risk of breast and gynecologic cancers. A comprehensive search was conducted in PubMed and Embase electronic databases up to 19th August 2017 for studies about the association between MGMT promoter hypermethylation and breast and gynecologic cancers. A total of 28 articles including 2,171 tumor tissues and 1,191 controls were involved in the meta-analysis. The pooled results showed that MGMT promoter methylation status was significantly associated with an increased risk of breast and gynecologic cancers (OR = 4.37, 95% CI: 2.68-7.13, P < 0.05). The associations were robust in subgroup analysis based on ethnicity, cancer type, methylation detection method, and control source. This meta-analysis indicated that MGMT hypermethylation was significantly associated with the risk of breast and gynecological cancers, and it may be utilized as a valuable biomarker in early diagnostics and prognostication of these cancers. Further efforts are needed to identify and validate this finding in prospective studies, especially in situation with new methylation testing methods and samples from plasma circulating DNA.

The utility and reliability of assessing molecular biomarkers for translational applications on pre-operative core biopsy specimens assume consistency of molecular profiles with larger surgical specimens. Whether DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), measured in core biopsy and surgical specimens are similar, remains unclear. Here, we compared genome-scale DNA methylation measured in matched core biopsy and surgical specimens from DCIS, including specific DNA methylation biomarkers of subsequent invasive cancer. DNA was extracted from guided 2mm cores of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens, bisulfite-modified, and measured on the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. DNA methylation profiles of core biopsies exhibited high concordance with matched surgical specimens. Within-subject variability in DNA methylation was significantly lower than between-subject variability (all P<2.20E-16). In 641 CpGs whose methylation was related with increased hazard of invasive breast cancer, lower within-subject than between-subject variability was observed in 92.3% of the study participants (P<0.05). Between patient-matched core biopsy and surgical specimens, <0.6% of CpGs measured had changes in median DNA methylation >15%, and a pathway analysis of these CpGs indicated enrichment for genes related with wound healing. Our results indicate that DNA methylation measured in core biopsies are representative of the matched surgical specimens and suggest that DCIS biomarkers measured in core biopsies can inform clinical decision-making.. The utility and reliability of assessing molecular biomarkers for translational applications on pre-operative core biopsy specimens assume consistency of molecular profiles with larger surgical specimens. Whether DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), measured in core biopsy and surgical specimens are similar, remains unclear. Here, we compared genome-scale DNA methylation measured in matched core biopsy and surgical specimens from DCIS, including specific DNA methylation biomarkers of subsequent invasive cancer. DNA was extracted from guided 2mm cores of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) specimens, bisulfite-modified, and measured on the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. DNA methylation profiles of core biopsies exhibited high concordance with matched surgical specimens. Within-subject variability in DNA methylation was significantly lower than between-subject variability (all P<2.20E-16). In 641 CpGs whose methylation was related with increased hazard of invasive breast cancer, lower within-subject than between-subject variability was observed in 92.3% of the study participants (P<0.05). Between patient-matched core biopsy and surgical specimens, <0.6% of CpGs measured had changes in median DNA methylation >15%, and a pathway analysis of these CpGs indicated enrichment for genes related with wound healing. Our results indicate that DNA methylation measured in core biopsies are representative of the matched surgical specimens and suggest that DCIS biomarkers measured in core biopsies can inform clinical decision-making.

Hereditary breast cancer accounts for about 10% of breast cancer in the United States, but high-penetrance, germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are responsible for less than half of these high-risk families. Epigenetic modification of DNA by promoter methylation can result in a potentially heritable epimutation that silences the gene. Using a highly sensitive technique, we assayed the BRCA1 gene for promoter methylation among 41 BRCA1- and BRCA2-negative women whose personal and family histories indicated a high risk of BRCA mutations (median prior likelihood = 60%) using the BRCAPro model. DNA from 19 women who were "true negatives" for BRCA mutations served as controls. We found no evidence for promoter methylation among the high-risk women who tested negative for germ-line BRCA mutations. Thus, epimutation is an unlikely explanation for hereditary breast cancer in women who test negative for BRCA mutations.. Hereditary breast cancer accounts for about 10% of breast cancer in the United States, but high-penetrance, germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are responsible for less than half of these high-risk families. Epigenetic modification of DNA by promoter methylation can result in a potentially heritable epimutation that silences the gene. Using a highly sensitive technique, we assayed the BRCA1 gene for promoter methylation among 41 BRCA1- and BRCA2-negative women whose personal and family histories indicated a high risk of BRCA mutations (median prior likelihood = 60%) using the BRCAPro model. DNA from 19 women who were "true negatives" for BRCA mutations served as controls. We found no evidence for promoter methylation among the high-risk women who tested negative for germ-line BRCA mutations. Thus, epimutation is an unlikely explanation for hereditary breast cancer in women who test negative for BRCA mutations.

Transcriptional inactivation of breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) by DNA methylation is a frequent event in sporadic breast cancers. To investigate whether BRCA1 methylation is associated with survival in Chinese patients with sporadic breast cancer, BRCA1 methylation was determined using methylation specific PCR in 536 sporadic breast cancers. Survival curves for patients with methylated and unmethylated BRCA1 were compared using the log-rank tests. Twenty-six percent (139/536) of patients exhibited BRCA1 methylation in their tumors. The degree of BRCA1 methylation was correlated with clinical stages of breast cancer, but was not significant. Patients with BRCA1 methylated tumors had a significantly worse 5-year disease-free survival (DFS) and 5-year disease-specific survival (DSS) than did patients with unmethylated tumors (DFS: 73.2%vs 82.6%, P = 0.045; DSS 80.5%vs 87%, P = 0.038, two-sided). In conclusions, BRCA1 methylation is a frequent event in breast cancer and is associated with poor clinical outcome in Chinese women with breast cancer.. Transcriptional inactivation of breast cancer gene 1 (BRCA1) by DNA methylation is a frequent event in sporadic breast cancers. To investigate whether BRCA1 methylation is associated with survival in Chinese patients with sporadic breast cancer, BRCA1 methylation was determined using methylation specific PCR in 536 sporadic breast cancers. Survival curves for patients with methylated and unmethylated BRCA1 were compared using the log-rank tests. Twenty-six percent (139/536) of patients exhibited BRCA1 methylation in their tumors. The degree of BRCA1 methylation was correlated with clinical stages of breast cancer, but was not significant. Patients with BRCA1 methylated tumors had a significantly worse 5-year disease-free survival (DFS) and 5-year disease-specific survival (DSS) than did patients with unmethylated tumors (DFS: 73.2%vs 82.6%, P = 0.045; DSS 80.5%vs 87%, P = 0.038, two-sided). In conclusions, BRCA1 methylation is a frequent event in breast cancer and is associated with poor clinical outcome in Chinese women with breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate relationship between methylation status of the APC and Bikunin CpG islands and clinicopathological characteristics of breast carcinomas. METHODS: The methylation status of APC and Bikunin CpG islands in 152 sporadic breast carcinoma samples were analyzed by methylation specific PCR. RESULTS: 40.8% of breast carcinomas examined showed methylated signals for the APC. The methylation frequency of APC was significantly correlated to the tumor size (chi(2) = 4.041; P = 0.044), but not to patients' age, pathologic type of tumor, clinical stage, histological grade, lymph node metastasis and the status of estrogen or progestogen receptor. In addition, 24.6% of carcinoma samples examined revealed strong methylated signals for Bikunin. No significant correlation was found between the aberrant methylation of Bikunin and the clinicopathological characteristics of sporadic breast carcinomas. CONCLUSION: The aberrant methylations of APC and Bikunin are frequent events during breast carcinogenesis. APC methylation might play a role in the progression of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate relationship between methylation status of the APC and Bikunin CpG islands and clinicopathological characteristics of breast carcinomas. METHODS: The methylation status of APC and Bikunin CpG islands in 152 sporadic breast carcinoma samples were analyzed by methylation specific PCR. RESULTS: 40.8% of breast carcinomas examined showed methylated signals for the APC. The methylation frequency of APC was significantly correlated to the tumor size (chi(2) = 4.041; P = 0.044), but not to patients' age, pathologic type of tumor, clinical stage, histological grade, lymph node metastasis and the status of estrogen or progestogen receptor. In addition, 24.6% of carcinoma samples examined revealed strong methylated signals for Bikunin. No significant correlation was found between the aberrant methylation of Bikunin and the clinicopathological characteristics of sporadic breast carcinomas. CONCLUSION: The aberrant methylations of APC and Bikunin are frequent events during breast carcinogenesis. APC methylation might play a role in the progression of breast cancer.

Methylation has been shown to play an important role in the down-regulation of oestrogen receptors (ER) in breast cancer cells. One critical question that remains unclear is whether methylation can account for the loss of ER expression in cells derived from an ER-positive cell line. This laboratory has established an in vitro cell system using long-term growth of human ER-positive breast cancer cell line T47D in oestrogen-free medium. A clonal cell line, T47D:C4:2 (C4:2), has been characterized. Unlike T47D:A18 (A18), which is a T47D line maintained in oestrogen medium, C4:2 has lost the expression of ER and hormone responsiveness. DNA fingerprinting and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis results confirmed that C4:2 was of the same lineage as A18. These cell lines provide an invaluable system to study the mechanism of ER expression and regulatory pathways leading to hormone-independent growth. The results here clearly demonstrate that the ER CpG island in C4:2 cells remains unmethylated. The loss of ER in the cell line must be due to mechanisms other than methylation. We also evaluated the ER CpG island in the MDA-MB-231:10A (10A) cell line, which is a clone from the MDA-MB-231 line obtained from ATCC and the DNA from the MDA-MB-231 cell line used in the original report. Unlike the cell line from the report, which showed a full methylation pattern in the island, the 10A line only showed a partial methylation pattern in the CpG island. Possible mechanisms pertaining to the heterogeneous methylation pattern of the ER CpG island in the breast cancer cells are discussed.. Methylation has been shown to play an important role in the down-regulation of oestrogen receptors (ER) in breast cancer cells. One critical question that remains unclear is whether methylation can account for the loss of ER expression in cells derived from an ER-positive cell line. This laboratory has established an in vitro cell system using long-term growth of human ER-positive breast cancer cell line T47D in oestrogen-free medium. A clonal cell line, T47D:C4:2 (C4:2), has been characterized. Unlike T47D:A18 (A18), which is a T47D line maintained in oestrogen medium, C4:2 has lost the expression of ER and hormone responsiveness. DNA fingerprinting and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis results confirmed that C4:2 was of the same lineage as A18. These cell lines provide an invaluable system to study the mechanism of ER expression and regulatory pathways leading to hormone-independent growth. The results here clearly demonstrate that the ER CpG island in C4:2 cells remains unmethylated. The loss of ER in the cell line must be due to mechanisms other than methylation. We also evaluated the ER CpG island in the MDA-MB-231:10A (10A) cell line, which is a clone from the MDA-MB-231 line obtained from ATCC and the DNA from the MDA-MB-231 cell line used in the original report. Unlike the cell line from the report, which showed a full methylation pattern in the island, the 10A line only showed a partial methylation pattern in the CpG island. Possible mechanisms pertaining to the heterogeneous methylation pattern of the ER CpG island in the breast cancer cells are discussed.

Human Rad9 (hRad9), a structural homologue of yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad9, is involved in cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. hRad9 can serve as a corepressor of androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells, but little is known about its role in the development of breast or other cancers. In the present study, semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR showed that Rad9 mRNA levels were up-regulated in 52.1% (25 of 48) of breast tumors, and this up-regulation correlated with tumor size (P = 0.037) and local recurrence (P = 0.033). Overexpression of Rad9 mRNA was partly due to an increase in Rad9 gene number as measured by quantitative PCR. In other breast tumors with Rad9 mRNA overexpression but without increase in gene number, there was differential methylation of two putative Sp1/3 binding sites within the first and second introns of the Rad9 gene, which was similarly found in MCF-7 breast cancer cell line with increased Rad9 mRNA. Silencing Rad9 expression by RNA interference in MCF-7 cell line inhibited its proliferation in vitro. Promoter assays indicated that the Sp1/3 site in intron 2 may act as a silencer. In vivo binding of Sp3 to intron 2 was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Treatment of MCF-7 cell line with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine reduced Rad9 mRNA expression and also increased binding of Sp3 to the demethylated intron 2 region. Collectively, these findings suggest that Rad9 is a novel oncogene candidate activated by 11q13 amplification and DNA hypermethylation in breast cancer and may play a role in tumor proliferation and local invasion.. Human Rad9 (hRad9), a structural homologue of yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad9, is involved in cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. hRad9 can serve as a corepressor of androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells, but little is known about its role in the development of breast or other cancers. In the present study, semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR showed that Rad9 mRNA levels were up-regulated in 52.1% (25 of 48) of breast tumors, and this up-regulation correlated with tumor size (P = 0.037) and local recurrence (P = 0.033). Overexpression of Rad9 mRNA was partly due to an increase in Rad9 gene number as measured by quantitative PCR. In other breast tumors with Rad9 mRNA overexpression but without increase in gene number, there was differential methylation of two putative Sp1/3 binding sites within the first and second introns of the Rad9 gene, which was similarly found in MCF-7 breast cancer cell line with increased Rad9 mRNA. Silencing Rad9 expression by RNA interference in MCF-7 cell line inhibited its proliferation in vitro. Promoter assays indicated that the Sp1/3 site in intron 2 may act as a silencer. In vivo binding of Sp3 to intron 2 was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Treatment of MCF-7 cell line with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine reduced Rad9 mRNA expression and also increased binding of Sp3 to the demethylated intron 2 region. Collectively, these findings suggest that Rad9 is a novel oncogene candidate activated by 11q13 amplification and DNA hypermethylation in breast cancer and may play a role in tumor proliferation and local invasion.

BACKGROUND: The need for new prognostic factors in breast cancer is ever increasing as breast cancer management evolves. Aberrant DNA methylation plays a pivotal role in cancer development and progression; DNA methylation-based biomarkers may provide independent prognostic information. We used pyrosequencing to investigate the prognostic potential of quantitative DNA methylation of a large set of candidate genes in a Korean single-institution series of operable breast cancer. METHODS: Absolute DNA methylation in 20 candidate genes from an initial set of 30 genes was measured by pyrosequencing of bisulfite converted DNA in 121 fresh frozen breast cancer cases. Survival analyses used continuous and categorized (quintile-based) gene methylation data with time to recurrence (TTR) as an endpoint. Prognostic abilities of gene-only and risk-score models were explored. RESULTS: Median follow-up was 5.1 years; 25 recurrences (21%) were observed. Nodal status, methylation of TWIST1, SLIT2 (both as continuous and categorized variables) and APC, HLA-A, NKX2-5, SERPINB5, SFN (as categorized variables) were significantly prognostic; grade showed a prognostic trend. A multivariate model containing nodal status, grade and TWIST1 was a best fit (p< 0.001) in stepwise regression; risk-score based on this model separated patients into 3 distinct risk-groups (p< 0.001). A gene-only model based on TWIST1 and SFN also classified patients into distinct risk-groups (p=0.009). CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that accurate quantitative measurement of DNA methylation by pyrosequencing identifies a small set of genes with independent prognostic potential in breast cancer. These genes complement the current clinico-pathological prognostic factors and appear to be potential biomarkers that warrant further validation.. BACKGROUND: The need for new prognostic factors in breast cancer is ever increasing as breast cancer management evolves. Aberrant DNA methylation plays a pivotal role in cancer development and progression; DNA methylation-based biomarkers may provide independent prognostic information. We used pyrosequencing to investigate the prognostic potential of quantitative DNA methylation of a large set of candidate genes in a Korean single-institution series of operable breast cancer. METHODS: Absolute DNA methylation in 20 candidate genes from an initial set of 30 genes was measured by pyrosequencing of bisulfite converted DNA in 121 fresh frozen breast cancer cases. Survival analyses used continuous and categorized (quintile-based) gene methylation data with time to recurrence (TTR) as an endpoint. Prognostic abilities of gene-only and risk-score models were explored. RESULTS: Median follow-up was 5.1 years; 25 recurrences (21%) were observed. Nodal status, methylation of TWIST1, SLIT2 (both as continuous and categorized variables) and APC, HLA-A, NKX2-5, SERPINB5, SFN (as categorized variables) were significantly prognostic; grade showed a prognostic trend. A multivariate model containing nodal status, grade and TWIST1 was a best fit (p< 0.001) in stepwise regression; risk-score based on this model separated patients into 3 distinct risk-groups (p< 0.001). A gene-only model based on TWIST1 and SFN also classified patients into distinct risk-groups (p=0.009). CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that accurate quantitative measurement of DNA methylation by pyrosequencing identifies a small set of genes with independent prognostic potential in breast cancer. These genes complement the current clinico-pathological prognostic factors and appear to be potential biomarkers that warrant further validation.

Breast cancer progression, treatment resistance, and relapse are thought to originate from a small population of tumor cells, breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs). Identification of factors critical for BCSC function is therefore vital for the development of therapies. Here, we identify the arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as a key in vitro and in vivo regulator of BCSC proliferation and self-renewal and establish FOXP1, a winged helix/forkhead transcription factor, as a critical effector of PRMT5-induced BCSC function. Mechanistically, PRMT5 recruitment to the FOXP1 promoter facilitates H3R2me2s, SET1 recruitment, H3K4me3, and gene expression. Our findings are clinically significant, as PRMT5 depletion within established tumor xenografts or treatment of patient-derived BCSCs with a pre-clinical PRMT5 inhibitor substantially reduces BCSC numbers. Together, our findings highlight the importance of PRMT5 in BCSC maintenance and suggest that small-molecule inhibitors of PRMT5 or downstream targets could be an effective strategy eliminating this cancer-causing population.. Breast cancer progression, treatment resistance, and relapse are thought to originate from a small population of tumor cells, breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs). Identification of factors critical for BCSC function is therefore vital for the development of therapies. Here, we identify the arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as a key in vitro and in vivo regulator of BCSC proliferation and self-renewal and establish FOXP1, a winged helix/forkhead transcription factor, as a critical effector of PRMT5-induced BCSC function. Mechanistically, PRMT5 recruitment to the FOXP1 promoter facilitates H3R2me2s, SET1 recruitment, H3K4me3, and gene expression. Our findings are clinically significant, as PRMT5 depletion within established tumor xenografts or treatment of patient-derived BCSCs with a pre-clinical PRMT5 inhibitor substantially reduces BCSC numbers. Together, our findings highlight the importance of PRMT5 in BCSC maintenance and suggest that small-molecule inhibitors of PRMT5 or downstream targets could be an effective strategy eliminating this cancer-causing population.

DNA-demethylating agents activate tumor suppressor genes that are silenced by DNA methylation in cancer and are therefore emerging as a novel approach to cancer therapy. 5-azacytidine (VIDAZA), the first representative of this class of drugs was approved for treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes and is currently being tested on other cancers including solid tumors. However, 5-azacytidine or its deoxy-analog, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaCdR) could also induce methylated prometastatic genes by DNA demethylation and induce cancer cell invasiveness. Since 5-azacytidine is a potent cancer growth inhibitor, we tested whether combining it with a DNA-methylating agent, the methyl donor S-adenosyl methionine (SAM), would block the adverse demethylating activity of 5-azaCdR while maintaining its growth suppression effects. We show here using several invasive and non-invasive breast cancer cell lines that SAM inhibits global- and gene-specific demethylation induced by 5-azaCdR, prevents 5-azaCdR activation of prometastatic genes uPA and MMP2, resulting in inhibition of cell invasiveness while augmenting the growth inhibitory effects of 5-azaCdR and its effects on tumor suppressor genes. Combination of drugs acting on the DNA methylation machinery at different levels is proposed as a new strategy for epigenetic therapy of cancer.. DNA-demethylating agents activate tumor suppressor genes that are silenced by DNA methylation in cancer and are therefore emerging as a novel approach to cancer therapy. 5-azacytidine (VIDAZA), the first representative of this class of drugs was approved for treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes and is currently being tested on other cancers including solid tumors. However, 5-azacytidine or its deoxy-analog, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaCdR) could also induce methylated prometastatic genes by DNA demethylation and induce cancer cell invasiveness. Since 5-azacytidine is a potent cancer growth inhibitor, we tested whether combining it with a DNA-methylating agent, the methyl donor S-adenosyl methionine (SAM), would block the adverse demethylating activity of 5-azaCdR while maintaining its growth suppression effects. We show here using several invasive and non-invasive breast cancer cell lines that SAM inhibits global- and gene-specific demethylation induced by 5-azaCdR, prevents 5-azaCdR activation of prometastatic genes uPA and MMP2, resulting in inhibition of cell invasiveness while augmenting the growth inhibitory effects of 5-azaCdR and its effects on tumor suppressor genes. Combination of drugs acting on the DNA methylation machinery at different levels is proposed as a new strategy for epigenetic therapy of cancer.

UNLABELLED: Breast cancer metastasis suppressor-1 (BRMS1) differentially regulates the expression of multiple genes, leading to metastasis suppression without affecting orthotopic tumor growth. For the first time, BRMS1 promoter methylation was evaluated as a prognostic biomarker in primary breast tumors and a subset of corresponding circulating tumor cells (CTC). Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples were analyzed for BRMS1 methylation status using methylation-specific PCR in a human specimen cohort consisting of noncancerous tissues, benign fibroadenomas, and primary breast tumors, including some with adjacent noncancerous tissues. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a large subset of these patients were fixed in cytospins and analyzed. In addition, BRMS1 expression in cytospins was examined by double-immunofluorescence using anti-BRMS1 and pan-cytokeratin antibodies. BRMS1 promoter methylation was not detected in noncancerous breast tissues or benign fibroadenomas; however, methylation was observed in more than a third of primary breast tumors. Critically, BRMS1 promoter methylation in primary tumors was significantly associated with reduced disease-free survival with a trend toward reduced overall survival. Similarly, a third of cytospin samples were positive for the presence of CTCs, and the total number of detected CTCs was 41. Although a large fraction of CTCs were negative or maintained low expression of BRSM1, promoter methylation was observed in a small fraction of samples, implying that BRSM1 expression in CTCs was either downregulated or heterogeneous. In summary, these data define BRMS1 promoter methylation in primary breast tumors and associated CTCs. IMPLICATIONS: This study indicates that BRSM1 promoter methylation status has biomarker potential in breast cancer.. UNLABELLED: Breast cancer metastasis suppressor-1 (BRMS1) differentially regulates the expression of multiple genes, leading to metastasis suppression without affecting orthotopic tumor growth. For the first time, BRMS1 promoter methylation was evaluated as a prognostic biomarker in primary breast tumors and a subset of corresponding circulating tumor cells (CTC). Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples were analyzed for BRMS1 methylation status using methylation-specific PCR in a human specimen cohort consisting of noncancerous tissues, benign fibroadenomas, and primary breast tumors, including some with adjacent noncancerous tissues. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a large subset of these patients were fixed in cytospins and analyzed. In addition, BRMS1 expression in cytospins was examined by double-immunofluorescence using anti-BRMS1 and pan-cytokeratin antibodies. BRMS1 promoter methylation was not detected in noncancerous breast tissues or benign fibroadenomas; however, methylation was observed in more than a third of primary breast tumors. Critically, BRMS1 promoter methylation in primary tumors was significantly associated with reduced disease-free survival with a trend toward reduced overall survival. Similarly, a third of cytospin samples were positive for the presence of CTCs, and the total number of detected CTCs was 41. Although a large fraction of CTCs were negative or maintained low expression of BRSM1, promoter methylation was observed in a small fraction of samples, implying that BRSM1 expression in CTCs was either downregulated or heterogeneous. In summary, these data define BRMS1 promoter methylation in primary breast tumors and associated CTCs. IMPLICATIONS: This study indicates that BRSM1 promoter methylation status has biomarker potential in breast cancer.

INTRODUCTION: Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in the peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors has been widely studied for the early detection of metastatic spread. We evaluated whether there was an association between the origin of cfDNA and CTCs. We investigated whether SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 17 (SOX17) promoter methylation in CTCs was associated with the methylation pattern of this gene in matched cfDNA isolated from plasma of patients with breast cancer. METHODS: We examined SOX17 methylation in 79 primary breast tumors, in 114 paired samples of DNA isolated from CTCs and cfDNA, and in 60 healthy individuals. Isolated DNA was modified by sodium bisulfite and subjected to methylation specific PCR. RESULTS: The SOX17 promoter was methylated in 68 (86.0%) of 79 of primary breast tumors. In CTCs, SOX17 was methylated in 19 (34.5%) of 55 patients with early breast cancer, 27 (45.8%) of 59 patients with metastatic cancer, and 1 (4.3%) of 23 healthy individuals, whereas in matched cfDNA SOX17 was methylated in 19 (34.5%) of 55, 24 (40.7%) of 59, and 1 (2.0%) of 49 of these same groups, respectively. There was a significant correlation between SOX17 methylation in cfDNA and CTCs in patients with early breast cancer (P = 0.008), but not in patients with verified metastasis (P = 0.283). CONCLUSIONS: The SOX17 promoter is highly methylated in primary breast tumors, in CTCs isolated from patients with breast cancer, and in corresponding cfDNA samples. Our findings indicate a direct connection between the presence of CTCs and cfDNA in patients with operable breast cancer, after surgical removal of the primary tumor.. INTRODUCTION: Detection of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in the peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors has been widely studied for the early detection of metastatic spread. We evaluated whether there was an association between the origin of cfDNA and CTCs. We investigated whether SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 17 (SOX17) promoter methylation in CTCs was associated with the methylation pattern of this gene in matched cfDNA isolated from plasma of patients with breast cancer. METHODS: We examined SOX17 methylation in 79 primary breast tumors, in 114 paired samples of DNA isolated from CTCs and cfDNA, and in 60 healthy individuals. Isolated DNA was modified by sodium bisulfite and subjected to methylation specific PCR. RESULTS: The SOX17 promoter was methylated in 68 (86.0%) of 79 of primary breast tumors. In CTCs, SOX17 was methylated in 19 (34.5%) of 55 patients with early breast cancer, 27 (45.8%) of 59 patients with metastatic cancer, and 1 (4.3%) of 23 healthy individuals, whereas in matched cfDNA SOX17 was methylated in 19 (34.5%) of 55, 24 (40.7%) of 59, and 1 (2.0%) of 49 of these same groups, respectively. There was a significant correlation between SOX17 methylation in cfDNA and CTCs in patients with early breast cancer (P = 0.008), but not in patients with verified metastasis (P = 0.283). CONCLUSIONS: The SOX17 promoter is highly methylated in primary breast tumors, in CTCs isolated from patients with breast cancer, and in corresponding cfDNA samples. Our findings indicate a direct connection between the presence of CTCs and cfDNA in patients with operable breast cancer, after surgical removal of the primary tumor.

Circulating Tumour Cells (CTCs) and circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) represent a non-invasive liquid biopsy approach for the follow-up and therapy management of cancer patients. We evaluated whether DNA methylation status in CTCs and ctDNA is comparable and whether it reflects the status of primary tumours. We compared the methylation status of three genes, SOX17, CST6 and BRMS1 in primary tumours, corresponding CTCs and ctDNA in 153 breast cancer patients and healthy individuals, by using real time methylation specific PCR. We report a clear association between the EpCAM-positive CTC-fraction and ctDNA for SOX17 promoter methylation both for patients with early (P = 0.001) and metastatic breast cancer (P = 0.046) but not for CST6 and BRMS1. In early breast cancer, SOX17 promoter methylation in the EpCAM-positive CTC-fraction was associated with CK-19 mRNA expression (P = 0.006) and worse overall survival (OS) (P = 0.044). In the metastatic setting SOX17 promoter methylation in ctDNA was highly correlated with CK-19 (P = 0.04) and worse OS (Rho = 0.016). SOX17 methylation status in CTCs and ctDNA was comparable and was associated with CK-19 expression but was not reflecting the status of primary tumours in breast cancer. DNA methylation analysis of SOX17 in CTCs and matched ctDNA provides significant prognostic value.. Circulating Tumour Cells (CTCs) and circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) represent a non-invasive liquid biopsy approach for the follow-up and therapy management of cancer patients. We evaluated whether DNA methylation status in CTCs and ctDNA is comparable and whether it reflects the status of primary tumours. We compared the methylation status of three genes, SOX17, CST6 and BRMS1 in primary tumours, corresponding CTCs and ctDNA in 153 breast cancer patients and healthy individuals, by using real time methylation specific PCR. We report a clear association between the EpCAM-positive CTC-fraction and ctDNA for SOX17 promoter methylation both for patients with early (P = 0.001) and metastatic breast cancer (P = 0.046) but not for CST6 and BRMS1. In early breast cancer, SOX17 promoter methylation in the EpCAM-positive CTC-fraction was associated with CK-19 mRNA expression (P = 0.006) and worse overall survival (OS) (P = 0.044). In the metastatic setting SOX17 promoter methylation in ctDNA was highly correlated with CK-19 (P = 0.04) and worse OS (Rho = 0.016). SOX17 methylation status in CTCs and ctDNA was comparable and was associated with CK-19 expression but was not reflecting the status of primary tumours in breast cancer. DNA methylation analysis of SOX17 in CTCs and matched ctDNA provides significant prognostic value.

OBJECTIVES: We have recently shown that detection of CST6 promoter methylation in primary breast tumors can provide important prognostic information in patients with operable breast cancer and that CST6 promoter is also methylated in Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC). In this study we evaluated the presence of CST6 promoter methylation in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in plasma of breast cancer patients. DESIGN AND METHODS: Our study material consisted of: a) a pilot testing group of 27 patients with stage I-III operable breast cancer, 46 patients with verified metastasis and 37 healthy donors and b) an independent cohort of 123 consecutive stage I-III operable breast cancer patients. Methylated and unmethylated CST6 promoter sequences were detected by using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). CST6 immunohistochemical detection was performed in 20 corresponding primary tumor tissues. RESULTS: In the pilot testing group, CST6 promoter was methylated in 8/27 (29.6%) operable breast cancer patients, in 6/46 (13.0%) patients with verified metastasis but none of 37 healthy individuals (0%). In the independent cohort, 49/123 (39.8%) operable breast cancer patients were found positive. During the follow up period, 25/123 (20.3%) patients relapsed and 9/123 (7.3%) died. CST6 was methylated in cfDNA of 13/25 (52%) patients that relapsed and in 3/9 (33.3%) patients that died. CONCLUSIONS: CST6 promoter is highly methylated in cfDNA of breast cancer patients, but not in healthy individuals. CST6 promoter methylation in cfDNA, should be prospectively validated as a novel plasma tumor biomarker for breast cancer in a large cohort of breast cancer patients.. OBJECTIVES: We have recently shown that detection of CST6 promoter methylation in primary breast tumors can provide important prognostic information in patients with operable breast cancer and that CST6 promoter is also methylated in Circulating Tumor Cells (CTC). In this study we evaluated the presence of CST6 promoter methylation in cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating in plasma of breast cancer patients. DESIGN AND METHODS: Our study material consisted of: a) a pilot testing group of 27 patients with stage I-III operable breast cancer, 46 patients with verified metastasis and 37 healthy donors and b) an independent cohort of 123 consecutive stage I-III operable breast cancer patients. Methylated and unmethylated CST6 promoter sequences were detected by using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). CST6 immunohistochemical detection was performed in 20 corresponding primary tumor tissues. RESULTS: In the pilot testing group, CST6 promoter was methylated in 8/27 (29.6%) operable breast cancer patients, in 6/46 (13.0%) patients with verified metastasis but none of 37 healthy individuals (0%). In the independent cohort, 49/123 (39.8%) operable breast cancer patients were found positive. During the follow up period, 25/123 (20.3%) patients relapsed and 9/123 (7.3%) died. CST6 was methylated in cfDNA of 13/25 (52%) patients that relapsed and in 3/9 (33.3%) patients that died. CONCLUSIONS: CST6 promoter is highly methylated in cfDNA of breast cancer patients, but not in healthy individuals. CST6 promoter methylation in cfDNA, should be prospectively validated as a novel plasma tumor biomarker for breast cancer in a large cohort of breast cancer patients.

It is not yet clear whether white blood cell DNA global methylation is associated with breast cancer risk. In this review we examine the relationships between multiple breast cancer risk factors and three markers of global DNA methylation: LINE-1, 5-mdC, and Alu. A literature search was conducted using Pubmed up to April 1, 2016, using combinations of relevant outcomes such as "WBC methylation," "blood methylation," "blood LINE-1 methylation," and a comprehensive list of known and suspected breast cancer risk factors. Overall, the vast majority of reports in the literature have focused on LINE-1. There was reasonably consistent evidence across the studies examined that males have higher levels of LINE-1 methylation in WBC DNA than females. None of the other demographic, lifestyle, dietary, or health condition risk factors were consistently associated with LINE-1 DNA methylation across studies. With the possible exception of sex, there was also little evidence that the wide range of breast cancer risk factors we examined were associated with either of the other two global DNA methylation markers: 5-mdC and Alu. One possible implication of the observed lack of association between global WBC DNA methylation and known breast cancer risk factors is that the association between global WBC DNA methylation and breast cancer, if it exists, is due to a disease effect.. It is not yet clear whether white blood cell DNA global methylation is associated with breast cancer risk. In this review we examine the relationships between multiple breast cancer risk factors and three markers of global DNA methylation: LINE-1, 5-mdC, and Alu. A literature search was conducted using Pubmed up to April 1, 2016, using combinations of relevant outcomes such as "WBC methylation," "blood methylation," "blood LINE-1 methylation," and a comprehensive list of known and suspected breast cancer risk factors. Overall, the vast majority of reports in the literature have focused on LINE-1. There was reasonably consistent evidence across the studies examined that males have higher levels of LINE-1 methylation in WBC DNA than females. None of the other demographic, lifestyle, dietary, or health condition risk factors were consistently associated with LINE-1 DNA methylation across studies. With the possible exception of sex, there was also little evidence that the wide range of breast cancer risk factors we examined were associated with either of the other two global DNA methylation markers: 5-mdC and Alu. One possible implication of the observed lack of association between global WBC DNA methylation and known breast cancer risk factors is that the association between global WBC DNA methylation and breast cancer, if it exists, is due to a disease effect.

Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) has been considered as an estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) agonist due to its ability to interact with ERalpha and promote the cell proliferation of ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells. The impact of DEHP on the chemical therapy in breast cancer is little known. Two breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 (ERalpha-dependent) and MDA-MB-231 (ERalpha-independent) were examined. We found that DEHP impaired the effectiveness of camptothecin (CPT) and alleviated the CPT-induced formation of reactive oxygen species in ERalpha-positive MCF-7 cells, but not in ERalpha-negative MDA-MB-231 cells. DEHP also significantly protected MCF-7 cells against the genotoxicity of CPT. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling revealed that after 48 hours of exposure to 100 muM DEHP, MCF-7 cells exhibited a significant change in their DNA methylation pattern, including hypermethylation of 700 genes and hypomethylation of 221 genes. The impaired therapeutic response to CPT in DEHP-exposed MCF-7 cells is probably mediated by epigenetic changes, especially through Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. A zebrafish xenograft model confirmed the disruptive effect of DEHP on CPT-induced anti-growth of MCF-7 cells. In summary, DEHP exposure induces acquired CPT-resistance in breast cancer cells and epigenetic changes associated with Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activation are probably depending on an ER-positive status.. Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) has been considered as an estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) agonist due to its ability to interact with ERalpha and promote the cell proliferation of ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells. The impact of DEHP on the chemical therapy in breast cancer is little known. Two breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 (ERalpha-dependent) and MDA-MB-231 (ERalpha-independent) were examined. We found that DEHP impaired the effectiveness of camptothecin (CPT) and alleviated the CPT-induced formation of reactive oxygen species in ERalpha-positive MCF-7 cells, but not in ERalpha-negative MDA-MB-231 cells. DEHP also significantly protected MCF-7 cells against the genotoxicity of CPT. Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling revealed that after 48 hours of exposure to 100 muM DEHP, MCF-7 cells exhibited a significant change in their DNA methylation pattern, including hypermethylation of 700 genes and hypomethylation of 221 genes. The impaired therapeutic response to CPT in DEHP-exposed MCF-7 cells is probably mediated by epigenetic changes, especially through Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. A zebrafish xenograft model confirmed the disruptive effect of DEHP on CPT-induced anti-growth of MCF-7 cells. In summary, DEHP exposure induces acquired CPT-resistance in breast cancer cells and epigenetic changes associated with Wnt/beta-catenin signaling activation are probably depending on an ER-positive status.

BACKGROUND: Although aberrant CpG island methylation and subsequent silencing of the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) promoter has been observed in colorectal and gastric tumors recently, little is known about that in breast cancers. The aim of this study was to identify the methylation status of COX-2 as well as to determine the association between clinical characteristics and COX-2 methylation in breast cancer patients. METHODS: Using bisulfite modification and a methylation-specific PCR, we examined the methylation status of the COX-2 promoter in primary tumors from 110 breast cancer patients. Meanwhile, the expression of COX-2 protein was determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC). RESULTS: Twenty out of 110 (18.2%) primary breast cancers showed aberrant methylation of the 5' region of COX-2. Loss of expression of COX-2 protein was found in all tumors with COX-2 methylation. Methylation of COX-2 was strongly correlated with tumor size (P = 0.026), presence of axillary lymph node metastasis (P = 0.001) and lymphovascular permeation (P = 0.034). CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that COX-2 methylation is associated with good prognostic factors in breast cancer patients. COX-2 promoter methylation may be one of the mechanisms by which tumor cells regulate COX-2 expression.. BACKGROUND: Although aberrant CpG island methylation and subsequent silencing of the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) promoter has been observed in colorectal and gastric tumors recently, little is known about that in breast cancers. The aim of this study was to identify the methylation status of COX-2 as well as to determine the association between clinical characteristics and COX-2 methylation in breast cancer patients. METHODS: Using bisulfite modification and a methylation-specific PCR, we examined the methylation status of the COX-2 promoter in primary tumors from 110 breast cancer patients. Meanwhile, the expression of COX-2 protein was determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC). RESULTS: Twenty out of 110 (18.2%) primary breast cancers showed aberrant methylation of the 5' region of COX-2. Loss of expression of COX-2 protein was found in all tumors with COX-2 methylation. Methylation of COX-2 was strongly correlated with tumor size (P = 0.026), presence of axillary lymph node metastasis (P = 0.001) and lymphovascular permeation (P = 0.034). CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that COX-2 methylation is associated with good prognostic factors in breast cancer patients. COX-2 promoter methylation may be one of the mechanisms by which tumor cells regulate COX-2 expression.

Although tumor size and lymph node involvement are the current cornerstones of breast cancer prognosis, they have not been extensively explored in relation to tumor methylation attributes in conjunction with other tumor and patient dietary and hormonal characteristics. Using primary breast tumors from 162 (AJCC stage I-IV) women from the Kaiser Division of Research Pathways Study and the Illumina GoldenGate methylation bead-array platform, we measured 1,413 autosomal CpG loci associated with 773 cancer-related genes and validated select CpG loci with Sequenom EpiTYPER. Tumor grade, size, estrogen and progesterone receptor status, and triple negative status were significantly (Q-values <0.05) associated with altered methylation of 209, 74, 183, 69, and 130 loci, respectively. Unsupervised clustering, using a recursively partitioned mixture model (RPMM), of all autosomal CpG loci revealed eight distinct methylation classes. Methylation class membership was significantly associated with patient race (P<0.02) and tumor size (P<0.001) in univariate tests. Using multinomial logistic regression to adjust for potential confounders, patient age and tumor size, as well as known disease risk factors of alcohol intake and total dietary folate, were all significantly (P<0.0001) associated with methylation class membership. Breast cancer prognostic characteristics and risk-related exposures appear to be associated with gene-specific tumor methylation, as well as overall methylation patterns.. Although tumor size and lymph node involvement are the current cornerstones of breast cancer prognosis, they have not been extensively explored in relation to tumor methylation attributes in conjunction with other tumor and patient dietary and hormonal characteristics. Using primary breast tumors from 162 (AJCC stage I-IV) women from the Kaiser Division of Research Pathways Study and the Illumina GoldenGate methylation bead-array platform, we measured 1,413 autosomal CpG loci associated with 773 cancer-related genes and validated select CpG loci with Sequenom EpiTYPER. Tumor grade, size, estrogen and progesterone receptor status, and triple negative status were significantly (Q-values <0.05) associated with altered methylation of 209, 74, 183, 69, and 130 loci, respectively. Unsupervised clustering, using a recursively partitioned mixture model (RPMM), of all autosomal CpG loci revealed eight distinct methylation classes. Methylation class membership was significantly associated with patient race (P<0.02) and tumor size (P<0.001) in univariate tests. Using multinomial logistic regression to adjust for potential confounders, patient age and tumor size, as well as known disease risk factors of alcohol intake and total dietary folate, were all significantly (P<0.0001) associated with methylation class membership. Breast cancer prognostic characteristics and risk-related exposures appear to be associated with gene-specific tumor methylation, as well as overall methylation patterns.

Neuregulin-1 (NRG1) is both a candidate oncogene and a candidate tumour suppressor gene. It not only encodes the heregulins and other mitogenic ligands for the ERBB family, but also causes apoptosis in NRG1-expressing cells. We found that most breast cancer cell lines had reduced or undetectable expression of NRG1. This included cell lines that had translocation breaks in the gene. Similarly, expression in cancers was generally comparable to or less than that in various normal breast samples. Many non-expressing cell lines had extensive methylation of the CpG island at the principal transcription start site at exon 2 of NRG1. Expression was reactivated by demethylation. Many tumours also showed methylation, whereas normal mammary epithelial fragments had none. Lower NRG1 expression correlated with higher methylation. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated depletion of NRG1 increased net proliferation in a normal breast cell line and a breast cancer cell line that expressed NRG1. The short arm of chromosome 8 is frequently lost in epithelial cancers, and NRG1 is the most centromeric gene that is always affected. NRG1 may therefore be the major tumour suppressor gene postulated to be on 8p: it is in the correct location, is antiproliferative and is silenced in many breast cancers.. Neuregulin-1 (NRG1) is both a candidate oncogene and a candidate tumour suppressor gene. It not only encodes the heregulins and other mitogenic ligands for the ERBB family, but also causes apoptosis in NRG1-expressing cells. We found that most breast cancer cell lines had reduced or undetectable expression of NRG1. This included cell lines that had translocation breaks in the gene. Similarly, expression in cancers was generally comparable to or less than that in various normal breast samples. Many non-expressing cell lines had extensive methylation of the CpG island at the principal transcription start site at exon 2 of NRG1. Expression was reactivated by demethylation. Many tumours also showed methylation, whereas normal mammary epithelial fragments had none. Lower NRG1 expression correlated with higher methylation. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated depletion of NRG1 increased net proliferation in a normal breast cell line and a breast cancer cell line that expressed NRG1. The short arm of chromosome 8 is frequently lost in epithelial cancers, and NRG1 is the most centromeric gene that is always affected. NRG1 may therefore be the major tumour suppressor gene postulated to be on 8p: it is in the correct location, is antiproliferative and is silenced in many breast cancers.

DNA hypermethylation is a common epigenetic abnormality in cancer and may serve as a useful marker to clone cancer-related genes as well as a marker of clinical disease activity. To identify CpG islands methylated in prostate cancer, we used methylated CpG island amplification (MCA) coupled with representational difference analysis (RDA) on prostate cancer cell lines. We isolated 34 clones that corresponded to promoter CpG islands, including 5 reported targets of hypermethylation in cancer. We confirmed the data for 17 CpG islands by COBRA and/or pyrosequencing. All 17 genes were methylated in at least 2 cell lines of a 21-cancer cell line panel containing prostate cancer, colon cancer, leukemia, and breast cancer. Based on methylation in primary tumors compared to normal adjacent tissues, NKX2-5, CLSTN1, SPOCK2, SLC16A12, DPYS and NSE1 are candidate biomarkers for prostate cancer (methylation range 50%-85%). The combination of NSE1 or SPOCK2 hypermethylation showed a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 95% in differentiating cancer from normal. Similarly NKX2-5, SPOCK2, SLC16A12, DPYS and GALR2 are candidate biomarkers for colon cancer (methylation range 60%-95%) and GALR2 hypermethylation showed a sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 95%. Finally, SLC16A12, GALR2, TOX, SPOCK2, EGFR5 and DPYS are candidate biomarkers for breast cancer (methylation range 33%-79%) with the combination of EGFR5 or TOX hypermethylation showing a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 92%. Expression analysis for eight genes that had the most hypermethylation confirmed the methylation associated silencing and reactivation with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment. Our data identify new targets of transcriptional silencing in cancer, and provide new biomarkers that could be useful in screening for prostate cancer and other cancers.. DNA hypermethylation is a common epigenetic abnormality in cancer and may serve as a useful marker to clone cancer-related genes as well as a marker of clinical disease activity. To identify CpG islands methylated in prostate cancer, we used methylated CpG island amplification (MCA) coupled with representational difference analysis (RDA) on prostate cancer cell lines. We isolated 34 clones that corresponded to promoter CpG islands, including 5 reported targets of hypermethylation in cancer. We confirmed the data for 17 CpG islands by COBRA and/or pyrosequencing. All 17 genes were methylated in at least 2 cell lines of a 21-cancer cell line panel containing prostate cancer, colon cancer, leukemia, and breast cancer. Based on methylation in primary tumors compared to normal adjacent tissues, NKX2-5, CLSTN1, SPOCK2, SLC16A12, DPYS and NSE1 are candidate biomarkers for prostate cancer (methylation range 50%-85%). The combination of NSE1 or SPOCK2 hypermethylation showed a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 95% in differentiating cancer from normal. Similarly NKX2-5, SPOCK2, SLC16A12, DPYS and GALR2 are candidate biomarkers for colon cancer (methylation range 60%-95%) and GALR2 hypermethylation showed a sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 95%. Finally, SLC16A12, GALR2, TOX, SPOCK2, EGFR5 and DPYS are candidate biomarkers for breast cancer (methylation range 33%-79%) with the combination of EGFR5 or TOX hypermethylation showing a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 92%. Expression analysis for eight genes that had the most hypermethylation confirmed the methylation associated silencing and reactivation with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment. Our data identify new targets of transcriptional silencing in cancer, and provide new biomarkers that could be useful in screening for prostate cancer and other cancers.

The VNTR at c-Ha-ras resides in a hotspot for DNA methylation on chromosome 11 in human tumors, where it is flanked by two MspI restriction sites. We have investigated the nature of the MspI site polymorphism at the c-Ha-ras VNTR observed in variety of tumors including breast cancer.We find that the MspI site 5' to the VNTR is present in a Non-B DNA structure with single-strand character that renders it accessible to bisulfite modification under native conditions, while the MspI site 3' to the VNTR appears to reside in a normal B-form structure that is inaccessible to bisulfite. The non-B DNA structure accounts for the observed polymorphism since MspI cannot cleave single-stranded DNA and control experiments show that the MspI sites were neither mutated nor abnormally methylated. Southern blotting showed that structural polymorphism was present in tumor DNA and tumor adjacent normal tissue DNA but absent from lymphocyte DNA from the same patients. We conclude that the non-B DNA structural polymorphism detected in human tumors near the c-Ha-ras VNTR is a self-perpetuating epigenetic mark that manifests itself spontaneously during breast carcinogenesis in a methylation hot spot.. The VNTR at c-Ha-ras resides in a hotspot for DNA methylation on chromosome 11 in human tumors, where it is flanked by two MspI restriction sites. We have investigated the nature of the MspI site polymorphism at the c-Ha-ras VNTR observed in variety of tumors including breast cancer.We find that the MspI site 5' to the VNTR is present in a Non-B DNA structure with single-strand character that renders it accessible to bisulfite modification under native conditions, while the MspI site 3' to the VNTR appears to reside in a normal B-form structure that is inaccessible to bisulfite. The non-B DNA structure accounts for the observed polymorphism since MspI cannot cleave single-stranded DNA and control experiments show that the MspI sites were neither mutated nor abnormally methylated. Southern blotting showed that structural polymorphism was present in tumor DNA and tumor adjacent normal tissue DNA but absent from lymphocyte DNA from the same patients. We conclude that the non-B DNA structural polymorphism detected in human tumors near the c-Ha-ras VNTR is a self-perpetuating epigenetic mark that manifests itself spontaneously during breast carcinogenesis in a methylation hot spot.

DNA methylation has been implicated in breast cancer aetiology, but little is known about whether reproductive history and DNA methylation interact to influence carcinogenesis. This study examined modification of the association between global DNA methylation and breast cancer risk by reproductive characteristics. A population-based case-control study assessed reproductive history in an interviewer-administered questionnaire. Global DNA methylation was measured from white blood cell DNA using luminometric methylation assay (LUMA) and pyrosequencing assay (long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1). We estimated adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) among 1 070 breast cancer cases and 1 110 population-based controls. Effect modification was assessed on additive and multiplicative scales. LUMA methylation was associated with elevated breast cancer risk across all strata (comparing the highest to the lowest quartile), but estimates were higher among women with age at menarche </=12 years (OR = 2.87, 95%CI = 1.96-4.21) compared to >12 years (OR = 1.66, 95%CI = 1.20-2.29). We observed a 2-fold increase in the LUMA methylation-breast cancer association among women with age at first birth >23 years (OR = 2.62, 95%CI = 1.90-3.62) versus </=23 years (OR = 1.32, 95% CI = 0.84-2.05). No modification was evident for parity or lactation. Age at menarche and age at first birth may be modifiers of the association between global DNA methylation and breast cancer risk.. DNA methylation has been implicated in breast cancer aetiology, but little is known about whether reproductive history and DNA methylation interact to influence carcinogenesis. This study examined modification of the association between global DNA methylation and breast cancer risk by reproductive characteristics. A population-based case-control study assessed reproductive history in an interviewer-administered questionnaire. Global DNA methylation was measured from white blood cell DNA using luminometric methylation assay (LUMA) and pyrosequencing assay (long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1). We estimated adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) among 1 070 breast cancer cases and 1 110 population-based controls. Effect modification was assessed on additive and multiplicative scales. LUMA methylation was associated with elevated breast cancer risk across all strata (comparing the highest to the lowest quartile), but estimates were higher among women with age at menarche </=12 years (OR = 2.87, 95%CI = 1.96-4.21) compared to >12 years (OR = 1.66, 95%CI = 1.20-2.29). We observed a 2-fold increase in the LUMA methylation-breast cancer association among women with age at first birth >23 years (OR = 2.62, 95%CI = 1.90-3.62) versus </=23 years (OR = 1.32, 95% CI = 0.84-2.05). No modification was evident for parity or lactation. Age at menarche and age at first birth may be modifiers of the association between global DNA methylation and breast cancer risk.

Germline mutations of the BRCA2 gene on chromosome 13q12-q13 predispose to the development of early-onset breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Loss of heterozygosity detected using chromosome 13q markers in the vicinity of BRCA2 is observed in most cancers arising in carriers of germline BRCA2 mutations and also in 30-50% of sporadic breast and ovarian cancers. However, somatic mutations of BRCA2 are extremely rare in sporadic cancers. We have examined the hypothesis that expression of the BRCA2 gene may be suppressed in sporadic breast cancers by a mechanism that is associated with increased methylation of cytosine residues in the promoter region. Using a HpaII/MspI digestion-polymerase chain reaction based assay, the presence of 5-methylcytosine in three CpG dinucleotides within the BRCA2 promoter was assessed in 18 breast or ovarian cancer cell lines, in an SV40 large T antigen immortalized cell line derived from normal breast epithelial cells, in 64 primary sporadic breast cancers and peripheral blood leucocytes from these cases and in a number of other normal human tissues. Methylation was not detected in any of the tissues examined, suggesting that this mechanism of transcriptional repression is unlikely to explain the absence of somatic mutations in sporadic cancers.. Germline mutations of the BRCA2 gene on chromosome 13q12-q13 predispose to the development of early-onset breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Loss of heterozygosity detected using chromosome 13q markers in the vicinity of BRCA2 is observed in most cancers arising in carriers of germline BRCA2 mutations and also in 30-50% of sporadic breast and ovarian cancers. However, somatic mutations of BRCA2 are extremely rare in sporadic cancers. We have examined the hypothesis that expression of the BRCA2 gene may be suppressed in sporadic breast cancers by a mechanism that is associated with increased methylation of cytosine residues in the promoter region. Using a HpaII/MspI digestion-polymerase chain reaction based assay, the presence of 5-methylcytosine in three CpG dinucleotides within the BRCA2 promoter was assessed in 18 breast or ovarian cancer cell lines, in an SV40 large T antigen immortalized cell line derived from normal breast epithelial cells, in 64 primary sporadic breast cancers and peripheral blood leucocytes from these cases and in a number of other normal human tissues. Methylation was not detected in any of the tissues examined, suggesting that this mechanism of transcriptional repression is unlikely to explain the absence of somatic mutations in sporadic cancers.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully understood. METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer. RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (beta) values for the 167 most variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status, intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status. Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266 differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5. Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1, ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.. INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully understood. METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer. RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (beta) values for the 167 most variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status, intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status. Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266 differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5. Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1, ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PURPOSE: Tobacco smoking is a risk factor in several cancers, yet its roles as a putative etiologic exposure or poor prognostic factor in breast cancer are less clear. Altered DNA methylation contributes to breast cancer development and may provide a mechanistic link between smoking and gene expression changes leading to cancer development or progression. METHODS: Using a cancer-focused array, we examined methylation at 933 CpGs in 517 invasive breast tumors in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study to determine whether methylation patterns differ by exposure to tobacco smoke. Multivariable generalized linear regression models were used to compare tumor methylation profiles between smokers and never smokers, overall, or stratified on hormone receptor (HR) status. RESULTS: Modest differences in CpG methylation were detected at p < 0.05 in breast tumors from current or ever smokers compared with never smokers. In stratified analyses, HR- tumors from smokers exhibited primarily hypomethylation compared with tumors from never smokers; hypomethylation was similarly detected within the more homogeneous basal-like subtype. Most current smoking-associated CpG loci exhibited methylation levels in former smokers that were intermediate between those in current and never smokers and exhibited progressive changes in methylation with increasing duration of smoking. Among former smokers, restoration of methylation toward baseline (never smoking) levels was observed with increasing time since quitting. Moreover, smoking-related hypermethylation was stronger in HR+ breast tumors from blacks than in whites. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that breast tumor methylation patterns differ with tobacco smoke exposure; however, additional studies are needed to confirm these findings.. PURPOSE: Tobacco smoking is a risk factor in several cancers, yet its roles as a putative etiologic exposure or poor prognostic factor in breast cancer are less clear. Altered DNA methylation contributes to breast cancer development and may provide a mechanistic link between smoking and gene expression changes leading to cancer development or progression. METHODS: Using a cancer-focused array, we examined methylation at 933 CpGs in 517 invasive breast tumors in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study to determine whether methylation patterns differ by exposure to tobacco smoke. Multivariable generalized linear regression models were used to compare tumor methylation profiles between smokers and never smokers, overall, or stratified on hormone receptor (HR) status. RESULTS: Modest differences in CpG methylation were detected at p < 0.05 in breast tumors from current or ever smokers compared with never smokers. In stratified analyses, HR- tumors from smokers exhibited primarily hypomethylation compared with tumors from never smokers; hypomethylation was similarly detected within the more homogeneous basal-like subtype. Most current smoking-associated CpG loci exhibited methylation levels in former smokers that were intermediate between those in current and never smokers and exhibited progressive changes in methylation with increasing duration of smoking. Among former smokers, restoration of methylation toward baseline (never smoking) levels was observed with increasing time since quitting. Moreover, smoking-related hypermethylation was stronger in HR+ breast tumors from blacks than in whites. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that breast tumor methylation patterns differ with tobacco smoke exposure; however, additional studies are needed to confirm these findings.

BACKGROUND: African American (AA) women are diagnosed with more advanced breast cancers and have worse survival than white women, but a comprehensive understanding of the basis for this disparity remains unclear. Analysis of DNA methylation, an epigenetic mechanism that can regulate gene expression, could help to explain racial differences in breast tumor clinical biology and outcomes. METHODS: DNA methylation was evaluated at 1,287 CpGs in the promoters of cancer-related genes in 517 breast tumors of AA (n = 216) or non-AA (n = 301) cases in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study (CBCS). RESULTS: Multivariable linear regression analysis of all tumors, controlling for age, menopausal status, stage, intrinsic subtype, and multiple comparisons [false discovery rate (FDR)], identified seven CpG probes that showed significant (adjusted P < 0.05) differential methylation between AAs and non-AAs. Stratified analyses detected an additional four CpG probes differing by race within hormone receptor-negative (HR(-)) tumors. Genes differentially methylated by race included DSC2, KCNK4, GSTM1, AXL, DNAJC15, HBII-52, TUSC3, and TES; the methylation state of several of these genes may be associated with worse survival in AAs. TCGA breast tumor data confirmed the differential methylation by race and negative correlations with expression for most of these genes. Several loci also showed racial differences in methylation in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) from CBCS cases, indicating that these variations were not necessarily tumor-specific. CONCLUSIONS: Racial differences in the methylation of cancer-related genes are detectable in both tumors and PBLs from breast cancer cases. IMPACT: Epigenetic variation could contribute to differences in breast tumor development and outcomes between AAs and non-AAs.. BACKGROUND: African American (AA) women are diagnosed with more advanced breast cancers and have worse survival than white women, but a comprehensive understanding of the basis for this disparity remains unclear. Analysis of DNA methylation, an epigenetic mechanism that can regulate gene expression, could help to explain racial differences in breast tumor clinical biology and outcomes. METHODS: DNA methylation was evaluated at 1,287 CpGs in the promoters of cancer-related genes in 517 breast tumors of AA (n = 216) or non-AA (n = 301) cases in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study (CBCS). RESULTS: Multivariable linear regression analysis of all tumors, controlling for age, menopausal status, stage, intrinsic subtype, and multiple comparisons [false discovery rate (FDR)], identified seven CpG probes that showed significant (adjusted P < 0.05) differential methylation between AAs and non-AAs. Stratified analyses detected an additional four CpG probes differing by race within hormone receptor-negative (HR(-)) tumors. Genes differentially methylated by race included DSC2, KCNK4, GSTM1, AXL, DNAJC15, HBII-52, TUSC3, and TES; the methylation state of several of these genes may be associated with worse survival in AAs. TCGA breast tumor data confirmed the differential methylation by race and negative correlations with expression for most of these genes. Several loci also showed racial differences in methylation in peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL) from CBCS cases, indicating that these variations were not necessarily tumor-specific. CONCLUSIONS: Racial differences in the methylation of cancer-related genes are detectable in both tumors and PBLs from breast cancer cases. IMPACT: Epigenetic variation could contribute to differences in breast tumor development and outcomes between AAs and non-AAs.

Gene silencing associated with aberrant methylation of promoter region CpG islands is an acquired epigenetic alteration that serves as an alternative to genetic defects in the inactivation of tumor suppressor and other genes in human cancers. The hypothesis that aberrant methylation plays a direct causal role in carcinogenesis hinges on the question of whether aberrant methylation is sufficient to drive gene silencing. To identify downstream targets of methylation-induced gene silencing, we used a human cell model in which aberrant CpG island methylation is induced by ectopic expression of DNA methyltransferase. Here we report the isolation and characterization of TMS1 (target of methylation-induced silencing), a novel CpG island-associated gene that becomes hypermethylated and silenced in cells overexpressing DNA cytosine-5-methyltransferase-1. We also show that TMS1 is aberrantly methylated and silenced in human breast cancer cells. Forty percent (11 of 27) of primary breast tumors exhibited aberrant methylation of TMS1. TMS1 is localized to chromosome 16p11.2-12.1 and encodes a 22-kDa predicted protein containing a COOH-terminal caspase recruitment domain, a recently described protein interaction motif found in apoptotic signaling molecules. Ectopic expression of TMS1 induced apoptosis in 293 cells and inhibited the survival of human breast cancer cells. The data suggest that methylation-mediated silencing of TMS1 confers a survival advantage by allowing cells to escape from apoptosis, supporting a new role for aberrant methylation in breast tumorigenesis.. Gene silencing associated with aberrant methylation of promoter region CpG islands is an acquired epigenetic alteration that serves as an alternative to genetic defects in the inactivation of tumor suppressor and other genes in human cancers. The hypothesis that aberrant methylation plays a direct causal role in carcinogenesis hinges on the question of whether aberrant methylation is sufficient to drive gene silencing. To identify downstream targets of methylation-induced gene silencing, we used a human cell model in which aberrant CpG island methylation is induced by ectopic expression of DNA methyltransferase. Here we report the isolation and characterization of TMS1 (target of methylation-induced silencing), a novel CpG island-associated gene that becomes hypermethylated and silenced in cells overexpressing DNA cytosine-5-methyltransferase-1. We also show that TMS1 is aberrantly methylated and silenced in human breast cancer cells. Forty percent (11 of 27) of primary breast tumors exhibited aberrant methylation of TMS1. TMS1 is localized to chromosome 16p11.2-12.1 and encodes a 22-kDa predicted protein containing a COOH-terminal caspase recruitment domain, a recently described protein interaction motif found in apoptotic signaling molecules. Ectopic expression of TMS1 induced apoptosis in 293 cells and inhibited the survival of human breast cancer cells. The data suggest that methylation-mediated silencing of TMS1 confers a survival advantage by allowing cells to escape from apoptosis, supporting a new role for aberrant methylation in breast tumorigenesis.

. 
. 
Breast cancers (BCs) of the luminal B subtype are estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), highly proliferative, resistant to standard therapies and have a poor prognosis. To better understand this subtype we compared DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs), DNA promoter methylation, gene expression profiles, and somatic mutations in nine selected genes, in 32 luminal B tumors with those observed in 156 BCs of the other molecular subtypes. Frequent CNAs included 8p11-p12 and 11q13.1-q13.2 amplifications, 7q11.22-q34, 8q21.12-q24.23, 12p12.3-p13.1, 12q13.11-q24.11, 14q21.1-q23.1, 17q11.1-q25.1, 20q11.23-q13.33 gains and 6q14.1-q24.2, 9p21.3-p24,3, 9q21.2, 18p11.31-p11.32 losses. A total of 237 and 101 luminal B-specific candidate oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) presented a deregulated expression in relation with their CNAs, including 11 genes previously reported associated with endocrine resistance. Interestingly, 88% of the potential TSGs are located within chromosome arm 6q, and seven candidate oncogenes are potential therapeutic targets. A total of 100 candidate oncogenes were validated in a public series of 5,765 BCs and the overexpression of 67 of these was associated with poor survival in luminal tumors. Twenty-four genes presented a deregulated expression in relation with a high DNA methylation level. FOXO3, PIK3CA and TP53 were the most frequent mutated genes among the nine tested. In a meta-analysis of next-generation sequencing data in 875 BCs, KCNB2 mutations were associated with luminal B cases while candidate TSGs MDN1 (6q15) and UTRN (6q24), were mutated in this subtype. In conclusion, we have reported luminal B candidate genes that may play a role in the development and/or hormone resistance of this aggressive subtype.. Breast cancers (BCs) of the luminal B subtype are estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), highly proliferative, resistant to standard therapies and have a poor prognosis. To better understand this subtype we compared DNA copy number aberrations (CNAs), DNA promoter methylation, gene expression profiles, and somatic mutations in nine selected genes, in 32 luminal B tumors with those observed in 156 BCs of the other molecular subtypes. Frequent CNAs included 8p11-p12 and 11q13.1-q13.2 amplifications, 7q11.22-q34, 8q21.12-q24.23, 12p12.3-p13.1, 12q13.11-q24.11, 14q21.1-q23.1, 17q11.1-q25.1, 20q11.23-q13.33 gains and 6q14.1-q24.2, 9p21.3-p24,3, 9q21.2, 18p11.31-p11.32 losses. A total of 237 and 101 luminal B-specific candidate oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) presented a deregulated expression in relation with their CNAs, including 11 genes previously reported associated with endocrine resistance. Interestingly, 88% of the potential TSGs are located within chromosome arm 6q, and seven candidate oncogenes are potential therapeutic targets. A total of 100 candidate oncogenes were validated in a public series of 5,765 BCs and the overexpression of 67 of these was associated with poor survival in luminal tumors. Twenty-four genes presented a deregulated expression in relation with a high DNA methylation level. FOXO3, PIK3CA and TP53 were the most frequent mutated genes among the nine tested. In a meta-analysis of next-generation sequencing data in 875 BCs, KCNB2 mutations were associated with luminal B cases while candidate TSGs MDN1 (6q15) and UTRN (6q24), were mutated in this subtype. In conclusion, we have reported luminal B candidate genes that may play a role in the development and/or hormone resistance of this aggressive subtype.

Upon soy consumption, isoflavone metabolites attain bioactive concentrations in breast tissue possibly affecting health. Though in vitro epigenetic activity of soy metabolites has been described, the in vivo impact on the epigenome is largely unknown. Therefore, in this case-control study, the breast glandular tissue DNA methylome was explored in women undergoing an aesthetic breast reduction. After a run-in phase, 10 generally healthy Belgian or Dutch women received soymilk for 5 days. MethylCap-seq methylation profiles were compared with those of 10 matched controls. Isoflavones and their microbial metabolites were quantified in urine, serum, and glandular breast tissue (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) and 17beta-estradiol in glandular breast tissue (immunoassay). Global DNA methylation levels were obtained for 6 cases and 5 controls using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Although lower MethylCap-seq coverages were observed, mass spectrometry results and computational LINE-1 methylation analysis did not provide evidence supporting global methylation alterations upon treatment. At a false discovery rate of 0.05, no differentially methylated loci were identified. Moreover, a set of previously identified loci was specifically tested, but earlier reported results could not be validated. In conclusion, after a 5-day soymilk treatment, no major general epigenetic reprogramming in breast tissue could be found in this exploratory study.. Upon soy consumption, isoflavone metabolites attain bioactive concentrations in breast tissue possibly affecting health. Though in vitro epigenetic activity of soy metabolites has been described, the in vivo impact on the epigenome is largely unknown. Therefore, in this case-control study, the breast glandular tissue DNA methylome was explored in women undergoing an aesthetic breast reduction. After a run-in phase, 10 generally healthy Belgian or Dutch women received soymilk for 5 days. MethylCap-seq methylation profiles were compared with those of 10 matched controls. Isoflavones and their microbial metabolites were quantified in urine, serum, and glandular breast tissue (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) and 17beta-estradiol in glandular breast tissue (immunoassay). Global DNA methylation levels were obtained for 6 cases and 5 controls using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Although lower MethylCap-seq coverages were observed, mass spectrometry results and computational LINE-1 methylation analysis did not provide evidence supporting global methylation alterations upon treatment. At a false discovery rate of 0.05, no differentially methylated loci were identified. Moreover, a set of previously identified loci was specifically tested, but earlier reported results could not be validated. In conclusion, after a 5-day soymilk treatment, no major general epigenetic reprogramming in breast tissue could be found in this exploratory study.

All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) regulates gene expression and is used to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia. Attempts to use atRA in breast cancer without a stratification strategy have resulted in limited overall effectiveness. To identify biomarkers for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) with atRA, we characterized the effects of atRA on the tumor growth of 13 TNBC cell lines. This resulted in a range of effects that was not predictable based on previously hypothesized predictors of response, such as the levels of atRA nuclear shuttling proteins fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5) and cellular retinoic acid binding protein 2 (CRABP2). Transcriptional profiling revealed that atRA induced distinct gene expression changes in the sensitive versus resistant cell lines that were mostly independent of the presence of retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) or peroxisome proliferator response elements (PPREs). Given the importance of DNA methylation in regulating gene expression, we hypothesized that differential DNA methylation could predict the response of TNBCs to atRA. We identified over 1400 sites that were differentially methylated between atRA resistant and sensitive cell lines. These CpG sites predicted the response of four TNBC patient-derived xenografts to atRA, and we utilized these xenografts to refine the profile and identified that as many as 17% of TNBC patients could benefit from atRA treatment. These data illustrate that differential methylation of specific CpGs may be useful biomarkers for predicting the response of patient tumors to atRA treatment.. All-trans retinoic acid (atRA) regulates gene expression and is used to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia. Attempts to use atRA in breast cancer without a stratification strategy have resulted in limited overall effectiveness. To identify biomarkers for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) with atRA, we characterized the effects of atRA on the tumor growth of 13 TNBC cell lines. This resulted in a range of effects that was not predictable based on previously hypothesized predictors of response, such as the levels of atRA nuclear shuttling proteins fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5) and cellular retinoic acid binding protein 2 (CRABP2). Transcriptional profiling revealed that atRA induced distinct gene expression changes in the sensitive versus resistant cell lines that were mostly independent of the presence of retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) or peroxisome proliferator response elements (PPREs). Given the importance of DNA methylation in regulating gene expression, we hypothesized that differential DNA methylation could predict the response of TNBCs to atRA. We identified over 1400 sites that were differentially methylated between atRA resistant and sensitive cell lines. These CpG sites predicted the response of four TNBC patient-derived xenografts to atRA, and we utilized these xenografts to refine the profile and identified that as many as 17% of TNBC patients could benefit from atRA treatment. These data illustrate that differential methylation of specific CpGs may be useful biomarkers for predicting the response of patient tumors to atRA treatment.

Breast cancer subtyping, based on the expression of hormone receptors and other genes, can determine patient prognosis and potential options for targeted therapy. Among breast cancer subtypes, tumors of basal-like and claudin-low subtypes are typically associated with worse patient outcomes, are primarily classified as triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC), and cannot be treated with existing hormone-receptor-targeted therapies. Understanding the molecular basis of these subtypes will lead to the development of more effective treatment options for TNBC. In this study, we focus on retinoic acid receptor responder 1 (RARRES1) as a paradigm to determine if breast cancer subtype dictates protein function and gene expression regulation. Patient tumor dataset analysis and gene expression studies of a 26 cell-line panel, representing the five breast cancer subtypes, demonstrate that RARRES1 expression is greatest in basal-like TNBCs. Cell proliferation and tumor growth assays reveal that RARRES1 is a tumor suppressor in TNBC. Furthermore, gene expression studies, Illumina HumanMethylation450 arrays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrate that expression of RARRES1 is retained in basal-like breast cancers due to hypomethylation of the promoter. Additionally, expression of the cancer stem cell marker, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3, which provides the required ligand (retinoic acid) for RARRES1 transcription, is also specific to the basal-like subtype. We functionally demonstrate that the combination of promoter methylation and retinoic acid signaling dictates expression of tumor suppressor RARRES1 in a subtype-specific manner. These findings provide a precedent for a therapeutically-inducible tumor suppressor and suggest novel avenues of therapeutic intervention for patients with basal-like breast cancer.. Breast cancer subtyping, based on the expression of hormone receptors and other genes, can determine patient prognosis and potential options for targeted therapy. Among breast cancer subtypes, tumors of basal-like and claudin-low subtypes are typically associated with worse patient outcomes, are primarily classified as triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC), and cannot be treated with existing hormone-receptor-targeted therapies. Understanding the molecular basis of these subtypes will lead to the development of more effective treatment options for TNBC. In this study, we focus on retinoic acid receptor responder 1 (RARRES1) as a paradigm to determine if breast cancer subtype dictates protein function and gene expression regulation. Patient tumor dataset analysis and gene expression studies of a 26 cell-line panel, representing the five breast cancer subtypes, demonstrate that RARRES1 expression is greatest in basal-like TNBCs. Cell proliferation and tumor growth assays reveal that RARRES1 is a tumor suppressor in TNBC. Furthermore, gene expression studies, Illumina HumanMethylation450 arrays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrate that expression of RARRES1 is retained in basal-like breast cancers due to hypomethylation of the promoter. Additionally, expression of the cancer stem cell marker, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3, which provides the required ligand (retinoic acid) for RARRES1 transcription, is also specific to the basal-like subtype. We functionally demonstrate that the combination of promoter methylation and retinoic acid signaling dictates expression of tumor suppressor RARRES1 in a subtype-specific manner. These findings provide a precedent for a therapeutically-inducible tumor suppressor and suggest novel avenues of therapeutic intervention for patients with basal-like breast cancer.

Background: Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer among women worldwide. Biomarkers for early detection and prognosis of these patients are needed. We hypothesized that deafness, autosomal dominant 5 (DFNA5) may be a valuable biomarker, based upon strong indications for its role as tumor suppressor gene and its function in regulated cell death. In this study, we aimed to analyze DFNA5 methylation and expression in the largest breast cancer cohort to date using publicly available data from TCGA, in order to further unravel the role of DFNA5 as detection and/or prognostic marker in breast cancer. We analyzed Infinium HumanMethylation450k data, covering 22 different CpGs in the DFNA5 gene (668 breast adenocarcinomas and 85 normal breast samples) and DFNA5 expression (Agilent 244K Custom Gene Expression: 476 breast adenocarcinomas and 56 normal breast samples; RNA-sequencing: 666 breast adenocarcinomas and 71 normal breast samples). Results: DFNA5 methylation and expression were significantly different between breast cancer and normal breast samples. Overall, breast cancer samples showed higher DFNA5 methylation in the putative gene promoter compared to normal breast samples, whereas in the gene body and upstream of the putative gene promoter, the opposite is true. Furthermore, DFNA5 methylation, in 10 out of 22 CpGs, and expression were significantly higher in lobular compared to ductal breast cancers. An important result of this study was the identification of a combination of one CpG in the gene promoter (CpG07504598) and one CpG in the gene body (CpG12922093) of DFNA5, which was able to discriminate between breast cancer and normal breast samples (AUC = 0.93). This model was externally validated in three independent datasets. Moreover, we showed that estrogen receptor state is associated with DFNA5 methylation and expression. Finally, we were able to find a significant effect of DFNA5 gene body methylation on a 5-year overall survival time. Conclusions: We conclude that DFNA5 methylation shows strong potential as detection and prognostic biomarker for breast cancer.. Background: Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer among women worldwide. Biomarkers for early detection and prognosis of these patients are needed. We hypothesized that deafness, autosomal dominant 5 (DFNA5) may be a valuable biomarker, based upon strong indications for its role as tumor suppressor gene and its function in regulated cell death. In this study, we aimed to analyze DFNA5 methylation and expression in the largest breast cancer cohort to date using publicly available data from TCGA, in order to further unravel the role of DFNA5 as detection and/or prognostic marker in breast cancer. We analyzed Infinium HumanMethylation450k data, covering 22 different CpGs in the DFNA5 gene (668 breast adenocarcinomas and 85 normal breast samples) and DFNA5 expression (Agilent 244K Custom Gene Expression: 476 breast adenocarcinomas and 56 normal breast samples; RNA-sequencing: 666 breast adenocarcinomas and 71 normal breast samples). Results: DFNA5 methylation and expression were significantly different between breast cancer and normal breast samples. Overall, breast cancer samples showed higher DFNA5 methylation in the putative gene promoter compared to normal breast samples, whereas in the gene body and upstream of the putative gene promoter, the opposite is true. Furthermore, DFNA5 methylation, in 10 out of 22 CpGs, and expression were significantly higher in lobular compared to ductal breast cancers. An important result of this study was the identification of a combination of one CpG in the gene promoter (CpG07504598) and one CpG in the gene body (CpG12922093) of DFNA5, which was able to discriminate between breast cancer and normal breast samples (AUC = 0.93). This model was externally validated in three independent datasets. Moreover, we showed that estrogen receptor state is associated with DFNA5 methylation and expression. Finally, we were able to find a significant effect of DFNA5 gene body methylation on a 5-year overall survival time. Conclusions: We conclude that DFNA5 methylation shows strong potential as detection and prognostic biomarker for breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Identification of methylation markers that are sensitive and specific for breast cancer may improve early detection. We hypothesize that DFNA5 promoter methylation can be a valuable epigenetic biomarker, based upon strong indications for its role as tumor suppressor gene and its function in regulated cell death. RESULTS: Statistically different levels of methylation were seen, with always very low levels in healthy breast reduction samples, very high levels in part of the adenocarcinoma samples and slightly increased levels in part of the normal tissue samples adjacent the tumor. One of the CpGs (CpG4) showed the best differentiation. A ROC curve for DFNA5 CpG4 methylation showed a sensitivity of 61.8% for the detection of breast cancer with a specificity of 100%. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed methylation analysis on four CpGs in the DFNA5 promoter region by bisulfite pyrosequencing on 123 primary breast adenocarcinomas and 24 healthy breast reductions. For 16 primary tumors, corresponding histological normal tissue adjacent to the tumor was available. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that DFNA5 methylation shows strong potential as a biomarker for detection of breast cancer. Slightly increased methylation in histologically normal breast tissue surrounding the tumor suggests that it may be a good early detection marker.. BACKGROUND: Identification of methylation markers that are sensitive and specific for breast cancer may improve early detection. We hypothesize that DFNA5 promoter methylation can be a valuable epigenetic biomarker, based upon strong indications for its role as tumor suppressor gene and its function in regulated cell death. RESULTS: Statistically different levels of methylation were seen, with always very low levels in healthy breast reduction samples, very high levels in part of the adenocarcinoma samples and slightly increased levels in part of the normal tissue samples adjacent the tumor. One of the CpGs (CpG4) showed the best differentiation. A ROC curve for DFNA5 CpG4 methylation showed a sensitivity of 61.8% for the detection of breast cancer with a specificity of 100%. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed methylation analysis on four CpGs in the DFNA5 promoter region by bisulfite pyrosequencing on 123 primary breast adenocarcinomas and 24 healthy breast reductions. For 16 primary tumors, corresponding histological normal tissue adjacent to the tumor was available. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that DFNA5 methylation shows strong potential as a biomarker for detection of breast cancer. Slightly increased methylation in histologically normal breast tissue surrounding the tumor suggests that it may be a good early detection marker.

. 
Liquid biopsy of cancers using DNA methylation biomarkers has received significant interest, where the quantification of multiple biomarkers is generally needed for improving the sensitivity and specificity of cancer diagnosis. However, the inefficiency of the traditional quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)-based MethyLight assay for detecting the extremely low concentration of methylated DNA fragments in body fluids limits its clinical applications. Here, we developed an ultrasensitive microwell chip digital polymerase chain reaction (dPCR)-based MethyLight assay. Using the synthesized samples, the developed MethyLight assay can achieve 103-104-fold lower limit of detection and 1-16-fold lower limit of quantification than the traditional MethyLight assay. Four hypermethylated alleles (RARbeta2, BRCA1, GSTP1 and RASSF1A) related to breast cancer in twenty-three clinical samples were tested using the microwell chip dPCR-based MethyLight assay. The results showed that the dPCR assay achieves approximately 2 times enhancement in the cancer detection rate over the traditional quantitative PCR. Furthermore, the dPCR can detect the healthy and benign samples, which are undetectable using the traditional MethyLight assay. In multiple gene analysis, we achieved the highest detection rate of 93.3% (in the "OR" format of RARbeta2 and GSTP1). Lastly, the estimated cut-off values in the dPCR assay were: <1, approximately 1 to 100 and >100 (copies per muL) referring to the healthy, benign and malignant breast cancers, respectively. Therefore, the developed microwell chip dPCR-based MethyLight assay could provide a powerful tool for cancer biopsy diagnosis and disease monitoring.. Liquid biopsy of cancers using DNA methylation biomarkers has received significant interest, where the quantification of multiple biomarkers is generally needed for improving the sensitivity and specificity of cancer diagnosis. However, the inefficiency of the traditional quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)-based MethyLight assay for detecting the extremely low concentration of methylated DNA fragments in body fluids limits its clinical applications. Here, we developed an ultrasensitive microwell chip digital polymerase chain reaction (dPCR)-based MethyLight assay. Using the synthesized samples, the developed MethyLight assay can achieve 103-104-fold lower limit of detection and 1-16-fold lower limit of quantification than the traditional MethyLight assay. Four hypermethylated alleles (RARbeta2, BRCA1, GSTP1 and RASSF1A) related to breast cancer in twenty-three clinical samples were tested using the microwell chip dPCR-based MethyLight assay. The results showed that the dPCR assay achieves approximately 2 times enhancement in the cancer detection rate over the traditional quantitative PCR. Furthermore, the dPCR can detect the healthy and benign samples, which are undetectable using the traditional MethyLight assay. In multiple gene analysis, we achieved the highest detection rate of 93.3% (in the "OR" format of RARbeta2 and GSTP1). Lastly, the estimated cut-off values in the dPCR assay were: <1, approximately 1 to 100 and >100 (copies per muL) referring to the healthy, benign and malignant breast cancers, respectively. Therefore, the developed microwell chip dPCR-based MethyLight assay could provide a powerful tool for cancer biopsy diagnosis and disease monitoring.

We conducted the present meta-analysis of relevant cohort studies to evaluate whether promoter methylation of the high in normal-1 (HIN-1) gene contributes to breast cancer. The MEDLINE (1966 ~ 2013), Cochrane Library (Issue 12, 2013), EMBASE (1980 ~ 2013), CINAHL (1982 ~ 2013), Web of Science (1945 ~ 2013), and Chinese Biomedical (CBM) (1982 ~ 2013) databases were searched without any language restrictions. Meta-analyses were conducted using Stata software (version 12.0; Stata Corporation, College Station, TX, USA). Crude odds ratios (ORs) with their 95 % confidence interval (CI) were calculated. Nine clinical cohort studies that enrolled a total of 693 breast cancer patients were included in the meta-analysis. The results of our meta-analysis demonstrated that HIN-1 methylation frequency in cancer tissue was significantly higher than that of normal and benign tissues (cancer tissue vs. normal tissue: OR = 52.60, 95 % CI = 33.77 ~ 81.92, P < 0.001; cancer tissue vs. benign tissue: OR = 2.38, 95 % CI = 1.53 ~ 3.70, P < 0.001; respectively). Ethnicity-stratified analysis indicated that HIN-1 promoter methylation was correlated with the pathogenesis of breast cancer among both Asians and Caucasians (all P < 0.05). Our findings provide empirical evidence that aberrant HIN-1 promoter methylation may contribute to the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Thus, aberrant HIN-1 promoter methylation could be an independent and important biomarker used in predicting the prognosis and progression of breast cancer.. We conducted the present meta-analysis of relevant cohort studies to evaluate whether promoter methylation of the high in normal-1 (HIN-1) gene contributes to breast cancer. The MEDLINE (1966 ~ 2013), Cochrane Library (Issue 12, 2013), EMBASE (1980 ~ 2013), CINAHL (1982 ~ 2013), Web of Science (1945 ~ 2013), and Chinese Biomedical (CBM) (1982 ~ 2013) databases were searched without any language restrictions. Meta-analyses were conducted using Stata software (version 12.0; Stata Corporation, College Station, TX, USA). Crude odds ratios (ORs) with their 95 % confidence interval (CI) were calculated. Nine clinical cohort studies that enrolled a total of 693 breast cancer patients were included in the meta-analysis. The results of our meta-analysis demonstrated that HIN-1 methylation frequency in cancer tissue was significantly higher than that of normal and benign tissues (cancer tissue vs. normal tissue: OR = 52.60, 95 % CI = 33.77 ~ 81.92, P < 0.001; cancer tissue vs. benign tissue: OR = 2.38, 95 % CI = 1.53 ~ 3.70, P < 0.001; respectively). Ethnicity-stratified analysis indicated that HIN-1 promoter methylation was correlated with the pathogenesis of breast cancer among both Asians and Caucasians (all P < 0.05). Our findings provide empirical evidence that aberrant HIN-1 promoter methylation may contribute to the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Thus, aberrant HIN-1 promoter methylation could be an independent and important biomarker used in predicting the prognosis and progression of breast cancer.

Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast is the most common cancer affecting women worldwide. The marked heterogeneity of breast cancer is matched only with the heterogeneity in its associated or causative factors. Breast cancer in Saudi Arabia is apparently an early onset with many of the affected females diagnosed before they reach the age of 50 years. One possible rationale underlying this observation is that consanguinity, which is widely spread in the Saudi community, is causing the accumulation of yet undetermined cancer susceptibility mutations. Another factor could be the accumulation of epigenetic aberrations caused by the shift toward a Western-like lifestyle in the past two decades. In order to shed some light into the molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer in the Saudi community, we identified KLOTHO (KL) as a tumor-specific methylated gene using genome-wide methylation analysis of primary breast tumors utilizing the MBD-seq approach. KL methylation was frequent as it was detected in 55.3 % of breast cancer cases from Saudi Arabia (n = 179) using MethyLight assay. Furthermore, KL is downregulated in breast tumors with its expression induced following treatment with 5-azacytidine. The involvement of KL in breast cancer led us to investigate its relationship in the context of breast cancer, with one of the protagonists of its function, fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4). Overexpression of FGFR4 in breast cancer is frequent in our cohort and this overexpression is associated with poor overall survival. Interestingly, FGFR4 expression is higher in the absence of KL methylation and lower when KL is methylated and presumably silenced, which is suggestive of an intricate relationship between the two factors. In conclusion, our findings further implicate "metabolic" genes or pathways in breast cancer that are disrupted by epigenetic mechanisms and could provide new avenues for understanding this disease in a new context.. Invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast is the most common cancer affecting women worldwide. The marked heterogeneity of breast cancer is matched only with the heterogeneity in its associated or causative factors. Breast cancer in Saudi Arabia is apparently an early onset with many of the affected females diagnosed before they reach the age of 50 years. One possible rationale underlying this observation is that consanguinity, which is widely spread in the Saudi community, is causing the accumulation of yet undetermined cancer susceptibility mutations. Another factor could be the accumulation of epigenetic aberrations caused by the shift toward a Western-like lifestyle in the past two decades. In order to shed some light into the molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer in the Saudi community, we identified KLOTHO (KL) as a tumor-specific methylated gene using genome-wide methylation analysis of primary breast tumors utilizing the MBD-seq approach. KL methylation was frequent as it was detected in 55.3 % of breast cancer cases from Saudi Arabia (n = 179) using MethyLight assay. Furthermore, KL is downregulated in breast tumors with its expression induced following treatment with 5-azacytidine. The involvement of KL in breast cancer led us to investigate its relationship in the context of breast cancer, with one of the protagonists of its function, fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4). Overexpression of FGFR4 in breast cancer is frequent in our cohort and this overexpression is associated with poor overall survival. Interestingly, FGFR4 expression is higher in the absence of KL methylation and lower when KL is methylated and presumably silenced, which is suggestive of an intricate relationship between the two factors. In conclusion, our findings further implicate "metabolic" genes or pathways in breast cancer that are disrupted by epigenetic mechanisms and could provide new avenues for understanding this disease in a new context.

Emerging evidence indicates that some altered patterns of methylation that occur in breast tumors may also be found in breast tissue of healthy women in relation to the breast cancer (BC) risk factors. Progesterone receptor (PR) isoform alpha is a crucial regulator of breast hormone responsiveness and its hypermethylation plays an important role in the initiation and development of breast tumors. However, such a methylation change in healthy women and its link with the different risk factors has not yet been investigated. In the present study, we aimed to examine the relationship of possible methylation changes within a critical region in the promoter CpG island of PGR-alpha (progesterone receptor alpha) gene in the healthy women with a set of reproductive and nonreproductive BC risk factors. The breast tissues were collected from 120 cancer-free women who had undergone cosmetic mammoplasty. The genomic DNA was extracted from the breast tissues and the methylation level of PGR-alpha promoter CpG island was determined by using MeDIP-qPCR assay. Using regression analysis, we found that increasing menarche age is inversely associated with the high methylation of PGR-alpha promoter ( beta = -0.790, SE = 0.362; P = 0.031). Although lactating women had more methylation than nonlactating women (P = 0.026, the t test), this result was not confirmed by regression models. Such an observation may be helpful in better understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which early age at menarche increases the risk of BC. However, this perspective requires further validations in larger studies of more subjects as well as the inclusion of other related genes.. Emerging evidence indicates that some altered patterns of methylation that occur in breast tumors may also be found in breast tissue of healthy women in relation to the breast cancer (BC) risk factors. Progesterone receptor (PR) isoform alpha is a crucial regulator of breast hormone responsiveness and its hypermethylation plays an important role in the initiation and development of breast tumors. However, such a methylation change in healthy women and its link with the different risk factors has not yet been investigated. In the present study, we aimed to examine the relationship of possible methylation changes within a critical region in the promoter CpG island of PGR-alpha (progesterone receptor alpha) gene in the healthy women with a set of reproductive and nonreproductive BC risk factors. The breast tissues were collected from 120 cancer-free women who had undergone cosmetic mammoplasty. The genomic DNA was extracted from the breast tissues and the methylation level of PGR-alpha promoter CpG island was determined by using MeDIP-qPCR assay. Using regression analysis, we found that increasing menarche age is inversely associated with the high methylation of PGR-alpha promoter ( beta = -0.790, SE = 0.362; P = 0.031). Although lactating women had more methylation than nonlactating women (P = 0.026, the t test), this result was not confirmed by regression models. Such an observation may be helpful in better understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which early age at menarche increases the risk of BC. However, this perspective requires further validations in larger studies of more subjects as well as the inclusion of other related genes.

Epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation, are widely studied in cancer as they are stable and easy to measure genome wide. DNA methylation changes have been used to differentiate benign from malignant tissue and to predict tumor recurrence or patient outcome. Multiple genome wide DNA methylation studies in breast and prostate cancers have identified genes that are differentially methylated in malignant tissue compared with non-malignant tissue or in association with hormone receptor status or tumor recurrence. Although this has identified potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis, what is highlighted by reviewing these studies is the similarities between breast and prostate cancers. In particular, the gene families/pathways targeted by DNA methylation in breast and prostate cancers have significant overlap and include homeobox genes, zinc finger transcription factors, S100 calcium binding proteins, and potassium voltage-gated family members. Many of the gene pathways targeted by aberrant methylation in breast and prostate cancers are not targeted in other cancers, suggesting that some of these targets may be specific to hormonal cancers. Genome wide DNA methylation profiles in breast and prostate cancers will not only define more specific and sensitive biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis but also identify novel therapeutic targets, which may be direct targets of agents that reverse DNA methylation or which may target novel gene families that are themselves DNA methylation targets.. Epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation, are widely studied in cancer as they are stable and easy to measure genome wide. DNA methylation changes have been used to differentiate benign from malignant tissue and to predict tumor recurrence or patient outcome. Multiple genome wide DNA methylation studies in breast and prostate cancers have identified genes that are differentially methylated in malignant tissue compared with non-malignant tissue or in association with hormone receptor status or tumor recurrence. Although this has identified potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis, what is highlighted by reviewing these studies is the similarities between breast and prostate cancers. In particular, the gene families/pathways targeted by DNA methylation in breast and prostate cancers have significant overlap and include homeobox genes, zinc finger transcription factors, S100 calcium binding proteins, and potassium voltage-gated family members. Many of the gene pathways targeted by aberrant methylation in breast and prostate cancers are not targeted in other cancers, suggesting that some of these targets may be specific to hormonal cancers. Genome wide DNA methylation profiles in breast and prostate cancers will not only define more specific and sensitive biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and prognosis but also identify novel therapeutic targets, which may be direct targets of agents that reverse DNA methylation or which may target novel gene families that are themselves DNA methylation targets.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease resulting in diverse clinical behaviours and therapeutic responses. DNA methylation is a major epigenetic alteration that is commonly perturbed in cancers. The aim of this study is to characterize the relationship between DNA methylation and aberrant gene expression in breast cancer. METHODS: We analysed DNA methylation and gene expression profiles from breast cancer tissue and matched normal tissue in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Genome-wide differential methylation analysis and methylation-gene expression correlation was performed. Gene expression changes were subsequently validated in the METABRIC dataset. The Oncoscore tool was used to identify genes that had previously been associated with cancer in the literature. A subset of genes that had not previously been studied in cancer was chosen for further analysis. RESULTS: We identified 368 CpGs that were differentially methylated between tumor and normal breast tissue (beta > 0.4). Hypermethylated CpGs were overrepresented in tumor tissue and were found predominantly (56%) in upstream promoter regions. Conversely, hypomethylated CpG sites were found primarily in the gene body (66%). Expression analysis revealed that 209 of the differentially-methylated CpGs were located in 169 genes that were differently expressed between normal and breast tumor tissue. Methylation-expression correlations were predominantly negative (70%) for promoter CpG sites and positive (74%) for gene body CpG sites. Among these differentially-methylated and differentially-expressed genes, we identified 7 that had not previously been studied in any form of cancer. Three of these, TDRD10, PRAC2 and TMEM132C, contained CpG sites that showed diagnostic and prognostic value in breast cancer, particularly in estrogen-receptor (ER)-positive samples. A pan-cancer analysis confirmed differential expression of these genes together with diagnostic and prognostic value of their respective CpG sites in multiple cancer types. CONCLUSION: We have identified 368 DNA methylation changes that characterize breast cancer tumor tissue, of which 209 are associated with genes that are differentially-expressed in the same samples. Novel DNA methylation markers were identified, of which cg12374721 (PRAC2), cg18081940 (TDRD10) and cg04475027 (TMEM132C) show promise as diagnostic and prognostic markers in breast cancer as well as other cancer types.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease resulting in diverse clinical behaviours and therapeutic responses. DNA methylation is a major epigenetic alteration that is commonly perturbed in cancers. The aim of this study is to characterize the relationship between DNA methylation and aberrant gene expression in breast cancer. METHODS: We analysed DNA methylation and gene expression profiles from breast cancer tissue and matched normal tissue in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Genome-wide differential methylation analysis and methylation-gene expression correlation was performed. Gene expression changes were subsequently validated in the METABRIC dataset. The Oncoscore tool was used to identify genes that had previously been associated with cancer in the literature. A subset of genes that had not previously been studied in cancer was chosen for further analysis. RESULTS: We identified 368 CpGs that were differentially methylated between tumor and normal breast tissue (beta > 0.4). Hypermethylated CpGs were overrepresented in tumor tissue and were found predominantly (56%) in upstream promoter regions. Conversely, hypomethylated CpG sites were found primarily in the gene body (66%). Expression analysis revealed that 209 of the differentially-methylated CpGs were located in 169 genes that were differently expressed between normal and breast tumor tissue. Methylation-expression correlations were predominantly negative (70%) for promoter CpG sites and positive (74%) for gene body CpG sites. Among these differentially-methylated and differentially-expressed genes, we identified 7 that had not previously been studied in any form of cancer. Three of these, TDRD10, PRAC2 and TMEM132C, contained CpG sites that showed diagnostic and prognostic value in breast cancer, particularly in estrogen-receptor (ER)-positive samples. A pan-cancer analysis confirmed differential expression of these genes together with diagnostic and prognostic value of their respective CpG sites in multiple cancer types. CONCLUSION: We have identified 368 DNA methylation changes that characterize breast cancer tumor tissue, of which 209 are associated with genes that are differentially-expressed in the same samples. Novel DNA methylation markers were identified, of which cg12374721 (PRAC2), cg18081940 (TDRD10) and cg04475027 (TMEM132C) show promise as diagnostic and prognostic markers in breast cancer as well as other cancer types.

Previously, we have shown that a strong correlation exists between the metastatic potential of breast carcinoma cell lines and their ectopic expression of IL-8. The undifferentiated, highly metastatic cell lines with high metastatic potential produce much more IL-8 than their differentiated lower metastatic counterparts. After eliminating the possibility that transcription factor activity was responsible for differences in IL-8 release, we examined the IL-8 gene for possible epigenetic modifications. Here, we report an aberrant methylation pattern that may be responsible for the differences in IL-8 release between the high and low metastatic cell lines. We determined that none of the deoxycytidylate-phosphate-deoxyguanylate (CpG) sites in the reported IL-8 promoter were methylated in either cell type. Much further upstream in the IL-8 gene, two CpG sites were identified that are differentially methylated. These two sites were fully methylated in the high metastatic cell lines, which produce large quantities of IL-8 and remain unmethylated in the low metastatic cell lines where the IL-8 gene is relatively silent. The DNA methylation results presented here differ from the common epigenetic paradigm in which methylation of promoter CpG islands silences gene expression, suggesting that there are additional epigenetic control mechanisms that as yet have not been fully appreciated or explored.. Previously, we have shown that a strong correlation exists between the metastatic potential of breast carcinoma cell lines and their ectopic expression of IL-8. The undifferentiated, highly metastatic cell lines with high metastatic potential produce much more IL-8 than their differentiated lower metastatic counterparts. After eliminating the possibility that transcription factor activity was responsible for differences in IL-8 release, we examined the IL-8 gene for possible epigenetic modifications. Here, we report an aberrant methylation pattern that may be responsible for the differences in IL-8 release between the high and low metastatic cell lines. We determined that none of the deoxycytidylate-phosphate-deoxyguanylate (CpG) sites in the reported IL-8 promoter were methylated in either cell type. Much further upstream in the IL-8 gene, two CpG sites were identified that are differentially methylated. These two sites were fully methylated in the high metastatic cell lines, which produce large quantities of IL-8 and remain unmethylated in the low metastatic cell lines where the IL-8 gene is relatively silent. The DNA methylation results presented here differ from the common epigenetic paradigm in which methylation of promoter CpG islands silences gene expression, suggesting that there are additional epigenetic control mechanisms that as yet have not been fully appreciated or explored.

BACKGROUND: Male breast cancer (MBC) represents a poorly characterised group of tumours, the management of which is largely based on practices established for female breast cancer. However, recent studies demonstrate biological and molecular differences likely to impact on tumour behaviour and therefore patient outcome. The aim of this study was to investigate methylation of a panel of commonly methylated breast cancer genes in familial MBCs. METHODS: 60 tumours from 3 BRCA1 and 25 BRCA2 male mutation carriers and 32 males from BRCAX families were assessed for promoter methylation by methylation-sensitive high resolution melting in a panel of 10 genes (RASSF1A, TWIST1, APC, WIF1, MAL, RARbeta, CDH1, RUNX3, FOXC1 and GSTP1). An average methylation index (AMI) was calculated for each case comprising the average of the methylation of the 10 genes tested as an indicator of overall tumour promoter region methylation. Promoter hypermethylation and AMI were correlated with BRCA carrier mutation status and clinicopathological parameters including tumour stage, grade, histological subtype and disease specific survival. RESULTS: Tumours arising in BRCA2 mutation carriers showed significantly higher methylation of candidate genes, than those arising in non-BRCA2 familial MBCs (average AMI 23.6 vs 16.6, p = 0.01, 45% of genes hypermethylated vs 34%, p < 0.01). RARbeta methylation and AMI-high status were significantly associated with tumour size (p = 0.01 and p = 0.02 respectively), RUNX3 methylation with invasive carcinoma of no special type (94% vs 69%, p = 0.046) and RASSF1A methylation with coexistence of high grade ductal carcinoma in situ (33% vs 6%, p = 0.02). Cluster analysis showed MBCs arising in BRCA2 mutation carriers were characterised by RASSF1A, WIF1, RARbeta and GTSP1 methylation (p = 0.02) whereas methylation in BRCAX tumours showed no clear clustering to particular genes. TWIST1 methylation (p = 0.001) and AMI (p = 0.01) were prognostic for disease specific survival. CONCLUSIONS: Increased methylation defines a subset of familial MBC and with AMI may be a useful prognostic marker. Methylation might be predictive of response to novel therapeutics that are currently under investigation in other cancer types.. BACKGROUND: Male breast cancer (MBC) represents a poorly characterised group of tumours, the management of which is largely based on practices established for female breast cancer. However, recent studies demonstrate biological and molecular differences likely to impact on tumour behaviour and therefore patient outcome. The aim of this study was to investigate methylation of a panel of commonly methylated breast cancer genes in familial MBCs. METHODS: 60 tumours from 3 BRCA1 and 25 BRCA2 male mutation carriers and 32 males from BRCAX families were assessed for promoter methylation by methylation-sensitive high resolution melting in a panel of 10 genes (RASSF1A, TWIST1, APC, WIF1, MAL, RARbeta, CDH1, RUNX3, FOXC1 and GSTP1). An average methylation index (AMI) was calculated for each case comprising the average of the methylation of the 10 genes tested as an indicator of overall tumour promoter region methylation. Promoter hypermethylation and AMI were correlated with BRCA carrier mutation status and clinicopathological parameters including tumour stage, grade, histological subtype and disease specific survival. RESULTS: Tumours arising in BRCA2 mutation carriers showed significantly higher methylation of candidate genes, than those arising in non-BRCA2 familial MBCs (average AMI 23.6 vs 16.6, p = 0.01, 45% of genes hypermethylated vs 34%, p < 0.01). RARbeta methylation and AMI-high status were significantly associated with tumour size (p = 0.01 and p = 0.02 respectively), RUNX3 methylation with invasive carcinoma of no special type (94% vs 69%, p = 0.046) and RASSF1A methylation with coexistence of high grade ductal carcinoma in situ (33% vs 6%, p = 0.02). Cluster analysis showed MBCs arising in BRCA2 mutation carriers were characterised by RASSF1A, WIF1, RARbeta and GTSP1 methylation (p = 0.02) whereas methylation in BRCAX tumours showed no clear clustering to particular genes. TWIST1 methylation (p = 0.001) and AMI (p = 0.01) were prognostic for disease specific survival. CONCLUSIONS: Increased methylation defines a subset of familial MBC and with AMI may be a useful prognostic marker. Methylation might be predictive of response to novel therapeutics that are currently under investigation in other cancer types.

Tumour suppressor gene (TSG) silencing through promoter hypermethylation plays an important role in cancer initiation. The aim of this study was to assess the extent of methylation of APC gene promoter in 91 sporadic and 44 familial cases of Tunisian patients with breast cancer (BC) in. The frequency of APC promoter methylation is somewhat similar for sporadic and familial breast cancer cases, (52.1%, and 54.5% respectively). For sporadic breast cancer patients, there was a significant correlation of APC promoter hypermethylation with TNM stage (p = 0.024) and 3-year survival (p = 0.025). Regarding the hormonal status (HR), we found significant association between negativity to PR and unmethylated APC (p= 0.005) while ER and Her2/neu are not correlated. Moreover, unmethylated APC promoter is more frequent in tumours expressing at least one out the 3 proteins compared to triple negative cases (p= 0.053). On the other hand, aberrant methylation of APC was associated with tumour size (p = 0.036), lymph node (p = 0.028), distant metastasis (p = 0.031), and 3-year survival (p = 0.046) in the group of patients with familial breast cancer. Moreover, patients with sporadic breast cancer displaying the unmethylated profile have a significant prolonged overall survival compared to those with the methylated pattern of APC promoter (p log rank = 0.008). Epigenetic change at the CpG islands in the APC promoter was associated with the silence of its transcript and the loss of protein expression suggesting that this event is the main mechanism regulating the APC expression in breast cancer. In conclusion, our data showed that the loss of APC through aberrant methylation is associated with the aggressive behavior of both sporadic and familial breast cancer in Tunisian patients.. Tumour suppressor gene (TSG) silencing through promoter hypermethylation plays an important role in cancer initiation. The aim of this study was to assess the extent of methylation of APC gene promoter in 91 sporadic and 44 familial cases of Tunisian patients with breast cancer (BC) in. The frequency of APC promoter methylation is somewhat similar for sporadic and familial breast cancer cases, (52.1%, and 54.5% respectively). For sporadic breast cancer patients, there was a significant correlation of APC promoter hypermethylation with TNM stage (p = 0.024) and 3-year survival (p = 0.025). Regarding the hormonal status (HR), we found significant association between negativity to PR and unmethylated APC (p= 0.005) while ER and Her2/neu are not correlated. Moreover, unmethylated APC promoter is more frequent in tumours expressing at least one out the 3 proteins compared to triple negative cases (p= 0.053). On the other hand, aberrant methylation of APC was associated with tumour size (p = 0.036), lymph node (p = 0.028), distant metastasis (p = 0.031), and 3-year survival (p = 0.046) in the group of patients with familial breast cancer. Moreover, patients with sporadic breast cancer displaying the unmethylated profile have a significant prolonged overall survival compared to those with the methylated pattern of APC promoter (p log rank = 0.008). Epigenetic change at the CpG islands in the APC promoter was associated with the silence of its transcript and the loss of protein expression suggesting that this event is the main mechanism regulating the APC expression in breast cancer. In conclusion, our data showed that the loss of APC through aberrant methylation is associated with the aggressive behavior of both sporadic and familial breast cancer in Tunisian patients.

DNA methylation dataset for human breast tumor tissue could aid in the diagnosis of the disease.. DNA methylation dataset for human breast tumor tissue could aid in the diagnosis of the disease.

Breast cancer is a molecularly, biologically and clinically heterogeneous group of disorders. Understanding this diversity is essential to improving diagnosis and optimizing treatment. Both genetic and acquired epigenetic abnormalities participate in cancer, but the involvement of the epigenome in breast cancer and its contribution to the complexity of the disease are still poorly understood. By means of DNA methylation profiling of 248 breast tissues, we have highlighted the existence of previously unrecognized breast cancer groups that go beyond the currently known 'expression subtypes'. Interestingly, we showed that DNA methylation profiling can reflect the cell type composition of the tumour microenvironment, and in particular a T lymphocyte infiltration of the tumours. Further, we highlighted a set of immune genes having high prognostic value in specific tumour categories. The immune component uncovered here by DNA methylation profiles provides a new perspective for the importance of the microenvironment in breast cancer, holding implications for better management of breast cancer patients.. Breast cancer is a molecularly, biologically and clinically heterogeneous group of disorders. Understanding this diversity is essential to improving diagnosis and optimizing treatment. Both genetic and acquired epigenetic abnormalities participate in cancer, but the involvement of the epigenome in breast cancer and its contribution to the complexity of the disease are still poorly understood. By means of DNA methylation profiling of 248 breast tissues, we have highlighted the existence of previously unrecognized breast cancer groups that go beyond the currently known 'expression subtypes'. Interestingly, we showed that DNA methylation profiling can reflect the cell type composition of the tumour microenvironment, and in particular a T lymphocyte infiltration of the tumours. Further, we highlighted a set of immune genes having high prognostic value in specific tumour categories. The immune component uncovered here by DNA methylation profiles provides a new perspective for the importance of the microenvironment in breast cancer, holding implications for better management of breast cancer patients.

Currently, most of the prognostic and predictive gene expression signatures emerging for breast cancer concern the tumor component. In Dedeurwaerder et al. we show that DNA methylation profiling of breast tumors is a particularly sensitive means of capturing features of the immune component of breast tumors. Most importantly, correlation is observed between T-cell marker genes and breast cancer clinical outcome.. Currently, most of the prognostic and predictive gene expression signatures emerging for breast cancer concern the tumor component. In Dedeurwaerder et al. we show that DNA methylation profiling of breast tumors is a particularly sensitive means of capturing features of the immune component of breast tumors. Most importantly, correlation is observed between T-cell marker genes and breast cancer clinical outcome.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer in women and consists of a heterogeneous collection of diseases with distinct histopathological, genetic and epigenetic characteristics. In this study, we aimed to identify DNA methylation based biomarkers to distinguish patients with locally advanced breast cancer who may benefit from neoadjuvant doxorubicin treatment. RESULTS: We investigated quantitatively the methylation patterns in the promoter regions of 14 genes (ABCB1, ATM, BRCA1, CDH3, CDKN2A, CXCR4, ESR1, FBXW7, FOXC1, GSTP1, IGF2, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, and PTEN) in 75 well-described pre-treatment samples from locally advanced breast cancer and correlated the results to the available clinical and molecular parameters. Six normal breast tissues were used as controls and 163 unselected breast cancer cases were used to validate associations with histopathological and clinical parameters.Aberrant methylation was detected in 9 out of the 14 genes including the discovery of methylation at the FOXC1 promoter. Absence of methylation at the ABCB1 promoter correlated with progressive disease during doxorubicin treatment. Most importantly, the DNA methylation status at the promoters of GSTP1, FOXC1 and ABCB1 correlated with survival, whereby the combination of methylated genes improved the subdivision with respect to the survival of the patients. In multivariate analysis GSTP1 and FOXC1 methylation status proved to be independent prognostic markers associated with survival. CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative DNA methylation profiling is a powerful tool to identify molecular changes associated with specific phenotypes. Methylation at the ABCB1 or GSTP1 promoter improved overall survival probably due to prolonged availability and activity of the drug in the cell while FOXC1 methylation might be a protective factor against tumour invasiveness. FOXC1 proved to be general prognostic factor, while ABCB1 and GSTP1 might be predictive factors for the response to and efficacy of doxorubicin treatment. Pharmacoepigenetic effects such as the reported associations in this study provide molecular explanations for differential responses to chemotherapy and it might prove valuable to take the methylation status of selected genes into account for patient management and treatment decisions.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer in women and consists of a heterogeneous collection of diseases with distinct histopathological, genetic and epigenetic characteristics. In this study, we aimed to identify DNA methylation based biomarkers to distinguish patients with locally advanced breast cancer who may benefit from neoadjuvant doxorubicin treatment. RESULTS: We investigated quantitatively the methylation patterns in the promoter regions of 14 genes (ABCB1, ATM, BRCA1, CDH3, CDKN2A, CXCR4, ESR1, FBXW7, FOXC1, GSTP1, IGF2, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, and PTEN) in 75 well-described pre-treatment samples from locally advanced breast cancer and correlated the results to the available clinical and molecular parameters. Six normal breast tissues were used as controls and 163 unselected breast cancer cases were used to validate associations with histopathological and clinical parameters.Aberrant methylation was detected in 9 out of the 14 genes including the discovery of methylation at the FOXC1 promoter. Absence of methylation at the ABCB1 promoter correlated with progressive disease during doxorubicin treatment. Most importantly, the DNA methylation status at the promoters of GSTP1, FOXC1 and ABCB1 correlated with survival, whereby the combination of methylated genes improved the subdivision with respect to the survival of the patients. In multivariate analysis GSTP1 and FOXC1 methylation status proved to be independent prognostic markers associated with survival. CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative DNA methylation profiling is a powerful tool to identify molecular changes associated with specific phenotypes. Methylation at the ABCB1 or GSTP1 promoter improved overall survival probably due to prolonged availability and activity of the drug in the cell while FOXC1 methylation might be a protective factor against tumour invasiveness. FOXC1 proved to be general prognostic factor, while ABCB1 and GSTP1 might be predictive factors for the response to and efficacy of doxorubicin treatment. Pharmacoepigenetic effects such as the reported associations in this study provide molecular explanations for differential responses to chemotherapy and it might prove valuable to take the methylation status of selected genes into account for patient management and treatment decisions.

Breast cancer clusters within families but genetic factors identified to date explain only a portion of this clustering. Lower global DNA methylation in white blood cells (WBC) has been associated with increased breast cancer risk. We examined whether WBC DNA methylation varies by extent of breast cancer family history in unaffected women from high-risk breast cancer families. We evaluated DNA methylation levels in LINE-1, Alu and Sat2 in 333 cancer-free female family members of the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry, the minority of which were known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers. We used generalized estimated equation models to test for differences in DNA methylation levels by extent of their breast cancer family history after adjusting for age. All unaffected women had at least one sister affected with breast cancer. LINE-1 and Sat2 DNA methylation levels were lower in individuals with 3 or more (3+) first-degree relatives with breast cancer relative to women with only one first-degree relative. For LINE-1, Alu, and Sat2, having 3+ affected first-degree relatives was associated with a decrease of 23.4% (95%CI = -46.8%, 0.1%), 17.9% (95%CI = -39.5%, 3.7%) and 11.4% (95% CI = -20.3%, -2.5%), respectively, relative to individuals with only one affected first-degree relative, but the results were only statistically significant for Sat2. Individuals having an affected mother had 17.9% lower LINE-1 DNA methylation levels (95% CI = -28.8%, -7.1%) when compared with those not having an affected mother. No associations were observed for Alu or Sat2 by maternal breast cancer status. If replicated, these results indicate that lower global WBC DNA methylation levels in families with extensive cancer histories may be one explanation for the clustering of cancers in these families. Family clustering of disease may reflect epigenetic as well as genetic and shared environmental factors.. Breast cancer clusters within families but genetic factors identified to date explain only a portion of this clustering. Lower global DNA methylation in white blood cells (WBC) has been associated with increased breast cancer risk. We examined whether WBC DNA methylation varies by extent of breast cancer family history in unaffected women from high-risk breast cancer families. We evaluated DNA methylation levels in LINE-1, Alu and Sat2 in 333 cancer-free female family members of the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry, the minority of which were known BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers. We used generalized estimated equation models to test for differences in DNA methylation levels by extent of their breast cancer family history after adjusting for age. All unaffected women had at least one sister affected with breast cancer. LINE-1 and Sat2 DNA methylation levels were lower in individuals with 3 or more (3+) first-degree relatives with breast cancer relative to women with only one first-degree relative. For LINE-1, Alu, and Sat2, having 3+ affected first-degree relatives was associated with a decrease of 23.4% (95%CI = -46.8%, 0.1%), 17.9% (95%CI = -39.5%, 3.7%) and 11.4% (95% CI = -20.3%, -2.5%), respectively, relative to individuals with only one affected first-degree relative, but the results were only statistically significant for Sat2. Individuals having an affected mother had 17.9% lower LINE-1 DNA methylation levels (95% CI = -28.8%, -7.1%) when compared with those not having an affected mother. No associations were observed for Alu or Sat2 by maternal breast cancer status. If replicated, these results indicate that lower global WBC DNA methylation levels in families with extensive cancer histories may be one explanation for the clustering of cancers in these families. Family clustering of disease may reflect epigenetic as well as genetic and shared environmental factors.

Lower global DNA methylation is associated with genomic instability and it is one of the epigenetic mechanisms relevant to carcinogenesis. Emerging evidence for several cancers suggests that lower overall levels of global DNA methylation in blood are associated with different cancer types, although less is known about breast cancer. We examined global DNA methylation levels using a sibling design in 273 sisters affected with breast cancer and 335 unaffected sisters from the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry. We measured global DNA methylation in total white blood cell (WBC) and granulocyte DNA by two different methods, the [ ( 3) H]-methyl acceptance assay and the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA). Global methylation levels were only modestly correlated between sisters discordant for breast cancer (Spearman correlation coefficients ranged from -0.08 to 0.24 depending on assay and DNA source). Using conditional logistic regression models, women in the quartile with the lowest DNA methylation levels (as measured by the [ ( 3) H]-methyl acceptance assay) had a 1.8-fold (95% CI = 1.0-3.3) higher relative association with breast cancer than women in the quartile with the highest DNA methylation levels. When we examined the association on a continuous scale, we also observed a positive association (odds ratio, OR = 1.3, 95% CI = 1.0-1.7, for a one unit change in the natural logarithm of the DPM/mug of DNA). We observed no association between measures by the LUMA assay and breast cancer risk. If replicated in prospective studies, this study suggests that global DNA methylation levels measured in WBC may be a potential biomarker of breast cancer risk even within families at higher risk of cancer.. Lower global DNA methylation is associated with genomic instability and it is one of the epigenetic mechanisms relevant to carcinogenesis. Emerging evidence for several cancers suggests that lower overall levels of global DNA methylation in blood are associated with different cancer types, although less is known about breast cancer. We examined global DNA methylation levels using a sibling design in 273 sisters affected with breast cancer and 335 unaffected sisters from the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry. We measured global DNA methylation in total white blood cell (WBC) and granulocyte DNA by two different methods, the [ ( 3) H]-methyl acceptance assay and the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA). Global methylation levels were only modestly correlated between sisters discordant for breast cancer (Spearman correlation coefficients ranged from -0.08 to 0.24 depending on assay and DNA source). Using conditional logistic regression models, women in the quartile with the lowest DNA methylation levels (as measured by the [ ( 3) H]-methyl acceptance assay) had a 1.8-fold (95% CI = 1.0-3.3) higher relative association with breast cancer than women in the quartile with the highest DNA methylation levels. When we examined the association on a continuous scale, we also observed a positive association (odds ratio, OR = 1.3, 95% CI = 1.0-1.7, for a one unit change in the natural logarithm of the DPM/mug of DNA). We observed no association between measures by the LUMA assay and breast cancer risk. If replicated in prospective studies, this study suggests that global DNA methylation levels measured in WBC may be a potential biomarker of breast cancer risk even within families at higher risk of cancer.

BACKGROUND: Lower levels of global DNA methylation in tissue and blood have been associated with increased cancer risk. Conversely, cross-sectional analyses of healthier lifestyle patterns have been associated with higher levels of global DNA methylation. OBJECTIVE: In this trial, we explored the associations between changes in lifestyle modifications (diet, weight loss), metabolic markers, and global epigenetic biomarkers in white blood cells. METHODS: Study participants were Hispanic, African American, and Afro-Caribbean overweight and sedentary female breast cancer survivors (n = 24) who participated in a larger randomized, crossover, pilot study of a 6-mo weight loss intervention and who had available blood specimens. Anthropometric measures, a food-frequency questionnaire, and peripheral blood were collected at baseline, 6 mo, and 12 mo. Plasma samples were analyzed for metabolic markers (insulin, glucose). We measured DNA methylation of long interspersed nucleotide element 1 (LINE-1) and satellite 2 by pyrosequencing and MethyLight, respectively, and global DNA methylation by the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA). RESULTS: DNA methylation of LINE-1 was statistically significantly elevated at 6 mo [75.5% vs. 78.5% (P < 0.0001)] and 12 mo [75.5% vs. 77.7% (P < 0.0001)], compared to baseline. Over a 12-mo period, changes in percentage body fat and plasma glucose concentrations were positively associated with LINE-1 DNA methylation (beta = 0.19, P = 0.001) and LUMA DNA methylation levels (beta = 0.24, P = 0.02), respectively. Similarly, 12-mo changes in dietary measures such as vegetable (beta = 0.009, P = 0.048), protein (beta = 0.04, P = 0.001), and total caloric (beta = 0.05, P = 0.01) intake were positively associated with changes in LUMA DNA methylation, as was intake of fruit positively associated with changes in LINE-1 DNA methylation (beta = 0.004, P = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Our hypothesis-generating results suggest that lifestyle modifications may be associated with changes in global DNA methylation detectable at 6 and 12 mo. These biomarkers may be useful intermediate biomarkers to use in future intervention trials. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00811824.. BACKGROUND: Lower levels of global DNA methylation in tissue and blood have been associated with increased cancer risk. Conversely, cross-sectional analyses of healthier lifestyle patterns have been associated with higher levels of global DNA methylation. OBJECTIVE: In this trial, we explored the associations between changes in lifestyle modifications (diet, weight loss), metabolic markers, and global epigenetic biomarkers in white blood cells. METHODS: Study participants were Hispanic, African American, and Afro-Caribbean overweight and sedentary female breast cancer survivors (n = 24) who participated in a larger randomized, crossover, pilot study of a 6-mo weight loss intervention and who had available blood specimens. Anthropometric measures, a food-frequency questionnaire, and peripheral blood were collected at baseline, 6 mo, and 12 mo. Plasma samples were analyzed for metabolic markers (insulin, glucose). We measured DNA methylation of long interspersed nucleotide element 1 (LINE-1) and satellite 2 by pyrosequencing and MethyLight, respectively, and global DNA methylation by the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA). RESULTS: DNA methylation of LINE-1 was statistically significantly elevated at 6 mo [75.5% vs. 78.5% (P < 0.0001)] and 12 mo [75.5% vs. 77.7% (P < 0.0001)], compared to baseline. Over a 12-mo period, changes in percentage body fat and plasma glucose concentrations were positively associated with LINE-1 DNA methylation (beta = 0.19, P = 0.001) and LUMA DNA methylation levels (beta = 0.24, P = 0.02), respectively. Similarly, 12-mo changes in dietary measures such as vegetable (beta = 0.009, P = 0.048), protein (beta = 0.04, P = 0.001), and total caloric (beta = 0.05, P = 0.01) intake were positively associated with changes in LUMA DNA methylation, as was intake of fruit positively associated with changes in LINE-1 DNA methylation (beta = 0.004, P = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Our hypothesis-generating results suggest that lifestyle modifications may be associated with changes in global DNA methylation detectable at 6 and 12 mo. These biomarkers may be useful intermediate biomarkers to use in future intervention trials. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00811824.

Early detection of breast cancer increases the chances of cure, but the reliable identification of impalpable lesions is still a challenge. In spite of the advances in breast cancer detection, the molecular basis of impalpable lesions and the corresponding circulating biomarkers are not well understood. Impalpable lesions, classified by radiologists according to the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System in the categories 3 and 4, can be either benign or malignant (slow growing or aggressive). In this article, we report the DNA methylation pattern in CDKN2A (p14(ARF)/p16(INK4a)) and in ATM gene promoters from 62 impalpable lesions, 39 peripheral blood samples, and 39 saliva samples, assessed by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction method. ATM showed the greatest percentage of methylation in DNA from lesions (benign and malignant), blood (even with p16(INK4a)), and saliva, followed by p16(INK4a) and p14(ARF). Among the malignant cases, ATM promoter was the most hypermethylated in lesion DNA and in blood and saliva DNAs, and p14(ARF), the least. The highest percentage of p16(INK4a) methylation was found in the blood. Finally, our data are relevant because they were obtained using impalpable breast lesions from patients who were carefully recruited in 2 public hospitals of Rio de Janeiro.. Early detection of breast cancer increases the chances of cure, but the reliable identification of impalpable lesions is still a challenge. In spite of the advances in breast cancer detection, the molecular basis of impalpable lesions and the corresponding circulating biomarkers are not well understood. Impalpable lesions, classified by radiologists according to the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System in the categories 3 and 4, can be either benign or malignant (slow growing or aggressive). In this article, we report the DNA methylation pattern in CDKN2A (p14(ARF)/p16(INK4a)) and in ATM gene promoters from 62 impalpable lesions, 39 peripheral blood samples, and 39 saliva samples, assessed by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction method. ATM showed the greatest percentage of methylation in DNA from lesions (benign and malignant), blood (even with p16(INK4a)), and saliva, followed by p16(INK4a) and p14(ARF). Among the malignant cases, ATM promoter was the most hypermethylated in lesion DNA and in blood and saliva DNAs, and p14(ARF), the least. The highest percentage of p16(INK4a) methylation was found in the blood. Finally, our data are relevant because they were obtained using impalpable breast lesions from patients who were carefully recruited in 2 public hospitals of Rio de Janeiro.

AIMS: We have studied whether TP53 rs1042522, rs17878362, and rs1625895 alleles having a protective effect against breast cancer (BC) will be lost in tumors, whereas those allowing disease development will be retained. METHODS: Analysis of TP53 polymorphisms was performed in blood leukocytes and tumors from 80 Caucasian BC patients. In addition, TP53 loss of heterozygosity (LOH), methylation, and mutations were studied in tumor DNA of BC individuals with loss of alleles of TP53 polymorphisms. RESULTS: In breast tumors of patients heterozygous for TP53 polymorphisms, we detected loss of rs1042522 C and G and rs17878362 A2 alleles; however, the loss of the C allele was preferential. We found that loss of TP53 alleles, namely rs1042522 C, has been caused by an LOH mechanism, namely TP53 deletions, whereas TP53 point mutations frequently occurred in the retained G allele (p=0.03). In addition, we showed that BC patients with rs1042522 CC genotype were characterized by only unifocal tumors and decreased frequency of lymph node metastases (p=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, we showed the preferential loss of the rs1042522 C allele, which is protective against BC progression, in breast tumors. Also, the loss of the C allele, which encodes p53 protein with the best DNA repair capability according to literature data, may create prerequisites for mutations, but not for methylation in a retained G variant, as we found here. However, these results need to be confirmed because of the limited statistical power of the present study and the small sampling.. AIMS: We have studied whether TP53 rs1042522, rs17878362, and rs1625895 alleles having a protective effect against breast cancer (BC) will be lost in tumors, whereas those allowing disease development will be retained. METHODS: Analysis of TP53 polymorphisms was performed in blood leukocytes and tumors from 80 Caucasian BC patients. In addition, TP53 loss of heterozygosity (LOH), methylation, and mutations were studied in tumor DNA of BC individuals with loss of alleles of TP53 polymorphisms. RESULTS: In breast tumors of patients heterozygous for TP53 polymorphisms, we detected loss of rs1042522 C and G and rs17878362 A2 alleles; however, the loss of the C allele was preferential. We found that loss of TP53 alleles, namely rs1042522 C, has been caused by an LOH mechanism, namely TP53 deletions, whereas TP53 point mutations frequently occurred in the retained G allele (p=0.03). In addition, we showed that BC patients with rs1042522 CC genotype were characterized by only unifocal tumors and decreased frequency of lymph node metastases (p=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, we showed the preferential loss of the rs1042522 C allele, which is protective against BC progression, in breast tumors. Also, the loss of the C allele, which encodes p53 protein with the best DNA repair capability according to literature data, may create prerequisites for mutations, but not for methylation in a retained G variant, as we found here. However, these results need to be confirmed because of the limited statistical power of the present study and the small sampling.

Global decrease in DNA methylation is a common feature of cancer and is associated with genomic and chromosomal instability. Retrospective case-control studies have reported that cancer patients have lower global methylation levels in blood DNA than do controls. We used prospectively collected samples and a case-cohort study design to examine global DNA methylation and incident breast cancer in 294 cases and a sample of 646 non-cases in the Sister Study, a study of 50 884 women aged 35-74 years who had not been diagnosed with breast cancer at the time of blood draw. Global methylation in DNA from peripheral blood was assessed by pyrosequencing of the LINE-1 repetitive element. Quartiles of LINE-1 methylation levels were associated with the risk of breast cancer in a dose-dependent fashion (P, trend = 0.002), with an increased risk observed among women in the lowest quartile compared with those in the highest quartile (hazard ratio = 1.75; 95% confidence interval 1.19, 2.59). We also examined 22 polymorphisms in 10 one-carbon metabolism genes in relation to both LINE-1 methylation levels and breast cancer. We found three single-nucleotide polymorphisms in those genes associated with LINE-1 methylation: SLC19A1 (rs1051266); MTRR (rs10380) and MTHFR (rs1537514), one of which was also associated with breast cancer risk: MTHFR (rs1537514). PON1 (rs757158) was associated with breast cancer but not methylation.. Global decrease in DNA methylation is a common feature of cancer and is associated with genomic and chromosomal instability. Retrospective case-control studies have reported that cancer patients have lower global methylation levels in blood DNA than do controls. We used prospectively collected samples and a case-cohort study design to examine global DNA methylation and incident breast cancer in 294 cases and a sample of 646 non-cases in the Sister Study, a study of 50 884 women aged 35-74 years who had not been diagnosed with breast cancer at the time of blood draw. Global methylation in DNA from peripheral blood was assessed by pyrosequencing of the LINE-1 repetitive element. Quartiles of LINE-1 methylation levels were associated with the risk of breast cancer in a dose-dependent fashion (P, trend = 0.002), with an increased risk observed among women in the lowest quartile compared with those in the highest quartile (hazard ratio = 1.75; 95% confidence interval 1.19, 2.59). We also examined 22 polymorphisms in 10 one-carbon metabolism genes in relation to both LINE-1 methylation levels and breast cancer. We found three single-nucleotide polymorphisms in those genes associated with LINE-1 methylation: SLC19A1 (rs1051266); MTRR (rs10380) and MTHFR (rs1537514), one of which was also associated with breast cancer risk: MTHFR (rs1537514). PON1 (rs757158) was associated with breast cancer but not methylation.

Downregulation of the tight junction protein claudin 1 is a frequent event in breast cancer and is associated with recurrence, metastasis, and reduced survival, suggesting a tumor suppressor role for this protein. Tumor suppressor genes are often epigenetically silenced in cancer. Downregulation of claudin 1 via DNA promoter methylation may thus be an important determinant in breast cancer development and progression. To investigate if silencing of claudin 1 has an epigenetic etiology in breast cancer we compared gene expression and methylation data from 217 breast cancer samples and 40 matched normal samples available through the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Moreover, we analyzed claudin 1 expression and methylation in 26 breast cancer cell lines. We found that methylation of the claudin 1 promoter CpG island is relatively frequent in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer and is associated with low claudin 1 expression. In contrast, the claudin 1 promoter was not methylated in most of the ER-breast cancers samples and some of these tumors overexpress claudin 1. In addition, we observed that the demethylating agents, azacitidine and decitabine can upregulate claudin 1 expression in breast cancer cell lines that have a methylated claudin 1 promoter. Taken together, our results indicate that DNA promoter methylation is causally associated with downregulation of claudin 1 in a subgroup of breast cancer that includes mostly ER+ tumors, and suggest that epigenetic therapy to restore claudin 1 expression might represent a viable therapeutic strategy in this subtype of breast cancer.. Downregulation of the tight junction protein claudin 1 is a frequent event in breast cancer and is associated with recurrence, metastasis, and reduced survival, suggesting a tumor suppressor role for this protein. Tumor suppressor genes are often epigenetically silenced in cancer. Downregulation of claudin 1 via DNA promoter methylation may thus be an important determinant in breast cancer development and progression. To investigate if silencing of claudin 1 has an epigenetic etiology in breast cancer we compared gene expression and methylation data from 217 breast cancer samples and 40 matched normal samples available through the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Moreover, we analyzed claudin 1 expression and methylation in 26 breast cancer cell lines. We found that methylation of the claudin 1 promoter CpG island is relatively frequent in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer and is associated with low claudin 1 expression. In contrast, the claudin 1 promoter was not methylated in most of the ER-breast cancers samples and some of these tumors overexpress claudin 1. In addition, we observed that the demethylating agents, azacitidine and decitabine can upregulate claudin 1 expression in breast cancer cell lines that have a methylated claudin 1 promoter. Taken together, our results indicate that DNA promoter methylation is causally associated with downregulation of claudin 1 in a subgroup of breast cancer that includes mostly ER+ tumors, and suggest that epigenetic therapy to restore claudin 1 expression might represent a viable therapeutic strategy in this subtype of breast cancer.

The potential role of p16(INK4a) methylation in breast cancer is controversial whereas there are no data on fibroadenoma. To assess if inactivation of p16(INK4a) by promoter hypermethylation occurs in this hyperproliferative benign breast lesion or, on the contrary, it is strictly related to the carcinogenic process, we have tested the different histological components of 15 cases of fibroadenoma and the intraductal and infiltrating components of 15 cases of carcinoma and their adjacent non-tumoral epithelium. All samples were obtained by laser-assisted microdissection. The relationship between promoter methylation status, immunohistochemical protein expression and ki67 proliferative activity was evaluated for each lesion. Our data demonstrate that hypermethylation of p16(INK4a) promoter is a common event occurring at similar frequency in all the different histological areas of the benign and malignant breast lesions taken into exam. Conversely, protein p16 expression, although heterogeneously distributed within the section, is considerably higher in breast carcinoma as compared to fibroadenoma in both tumoral and non-tumoral epithelia and stroma. The protein localization was almost exclusively nuclear in fibroadenoma and non-tumoral epithelia whereas, in carcinoma, the staining was both nuclear and cytoplasmic or cytoplasmic alone. Furthermore, in a subset of fibroadenoma with higher proliferative activity, p16 protein expression was substantially decreased as compared to those showing lower proliferation. We did not observe this association in carcinomas. Our data demonstrate that the hypermethylation of the p16(INK4a) promoter is not specifically associated with malignancy and that, on the contrary, the overexpression of p16 and its cytoplasmic sequestration is a feature of breast carcinoma.. The potential role of p16(INK4a) methylation in breast cancer is controversial whereas there are no data on fibroadenoma. To assess if inactivation of p16(INK4a) by promoter hypermethylation occurs in this hyperproliferative benign breast lesion or, on the contrary, it is strictly related to the carcinogenic process, we have tested the different histological components of 15 cases of fibroadenoma and the intraductal and infiltrating components of 15 cases of carcinoma and their adjacent non-tumoral epithelium. All samples were obtained by laser-assisted microdissection. The relationship between promoter methylation status, immunohistochemical protein expression and ki67 proliferative activity was evaluated for each lesion. Our data demonstrate that hypermethylation of p16(INK4a) promoter is a common event occurring at similar frequency in all the different histological areas of the benign and malignant breast lesions taken into exam. Conversely, protein p16 expression, although heterogeneously distributed within the section, is considerably higher in breast carcinoma as compared to fibroadenoma in both tumoral and non-tumoral epithelia and stroma. The protein localization was almost exclusively nuclear in fibroadenoma and non-tumoral epithelia whereas, in carcinoma, the staining was both nuclear and cytoplasmic or cytoplasmic alone. Furthermore, in a subset of fibroadenoma with higher proliferative activity, p16 protein expression was substantially decreased as compared to those showing lower proliferation. We did not observe this association in carcinomas. Our data demonstrate that the hypermethylation of the p16(INK4a) promoter is not specifically associated with malignancy and that, on the contrary, the overexpression of p16 and its cytoplasmic sequestration is a feature of breast carcinoma.

BACKGROUND: Various biomarkers for prediction of distant metastasis in lymph-node negative breast cancer have been described; however, predictive biomarkers for patients with lymph-node positive (LNP) disease in the context of distinct systemic therapies are still very much needed. DNA methylation is aberrant in breast cancer and is likely to play a major role in disease progression. In this study, the DNA methylation status of 202 candidate loci was screened to identify those loci that may predict outcome in LNP/estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer patients with adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. METHODS: Quantitative bisulfite sequencing was used to analyze DNA methylation biomarker candidates in a retrospective cohort of 162 LNP/ER+ breast cancer patients, who received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. First, twelve breast cancer specimens were analyzed for all 202 candidate loci to exclude genes that showed no differential methylation. To identify genes that predict distant metastasis, the remaining loci were analyzed in 84 selected cases, including the 12 initial ones. Significant loci were analyzed in the remaining 78 independent cases. Metastasis-free survival analysis was conducted by using Cox regression, time-dependent ROC analysis, and the Kaplan-Meier method. Pairwise multivariate regression analysis was performed by linear Cox Proportional Hazard models, testing the association between methylation scores and clinical parameters with respect to metastasis-free survival. RESULTS: Of the 202 loci analysed, 37 showed some indication of differential DNA methylation among the initial 12 patient samples tested. Of those, 6 loci were associated with outcome in the initial cohort (n = 84, log rank test, p < 0.05).Promoter DNA methylation of cysteine dioxygenase 1 (CDO1) was confirmed in univariate and in pairwise multivariate analysis adjusting for age at surgery, pathological T stage, progesterone receptor status, grade, and endocrine therapy as a strong and independent biomarker for outcome prediction in the independent validation set (log rank test p-value = 0.0010). CONCLUSIONS: CDO1 methylation was shown to be a strong predictor for distant metastasis in retrospective cohorts of LNP/ER+ breast cancer patients, who had received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy.. BACKGROUND: Various biomarkers for prediction of distant metastasis in lymph-node negative breast cancer have been described; however, predictive biomarkers for patients with lymph-node positive (LNP) disease in the context of distinct systemic therapies are still very much needed. DNA methylation is aberrant in breast cancer and is likely to play a major role in disease progression. In this study, the DNA methylation status of 202 candidate loci was screened to identify those loci that may predict outcome in LNP/estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer patients with adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. METHODS: Quantitative bisulfite sequencing was used to analyze DNA methylation biomarker candidates in a retrospective cohort of 162 LNP/ER+ breast cancer patients, who received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. First, twelve breast cancer specimens were analyzed for all 202 candidate loci to exclude genes that showed no differential methylation. To identify genes that predict distant metastasis, the remaining loci were analyzed in 84 selected cases, including the 12 initial ones. Significant loci were analyzed in the remaining 78 independent cases. Metastasis-free survival analysis was conducted by using Cox regression, time-dependent ROC analysis, and the Kaplan-Meier method. Pairwise multivariate regression analysis was performed by linear Cox Proportional Hazard models, testing the association between methylation scores and clinical parameters with respect to metastasis-free survival. RESULTS: Of the 202 loci analysed, 37 showed some indication of differential DNA methylation among the initial 12 patient samples tested. Of those, 6 loci were associated with outcome in the initial cohort (n = 84, log rank test, p < 0.05).Promoter DNA methylation of cysteine dioxygenase 1 (CDO1) was confirmed in univariate and in pairwise multivariate analysis adjusting for age at surgery, pathological T stage, progesterone receptor status, grade, and endocrine therapy as a strong and independent biomarker for outcome prediction in the independent validation set (log rank test p-value = 0.0010). CONCLUSIONS: CDO1 methylation was shown to be a strong predictor for distant metastasis in retrospective cohorts of LNP/ER+ breast cancer patients, who had received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

AIMS: DNA methylation has been shown to play an important role in breast cancer pathogenesis, but up until now it is not clear how the tissue components contribute to the overall methylation of the sample, because microdissection does not provide sufficient material for most standard methylation assays. METHODS: We developed a technology to analyse several methylation markers in a limited number of cells dissected from tissue sections. To evaluate the technology, we analysed, among others, the methylation markers PITX2, RASSF1A and TFF1 in 79 samples of three PITX2 methylation positive invasive ductal carcinomas. The microdissected samples were from the invasive part, the intraductal part, the stroma, tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, chest wall muscle, adipose tissue and healthy ducts. RESULTS: The multiplexed methylation analysis allows for the quantitative analysis of methylation patterns in microdissected samples with as few as 100 genome copies. In all analysed patients PITX2 and RASSF1A were highly methylated in invasive and intraductal carcinoma cells compared to other tissue components. TFF1 behaved inversely. PITX2 showed some methylation in normal adjacent breast tissue. The methylation of the individual markers varied little within one tissue type and between blocks. CONCLUSIONS: This technology is a powerful tool to analyse the methylation of multiple markers in different microdissected tissue components. Methylation patterns may differ significantly between different markers and tissue components. This technology may help to analyse different transitions states of breast and other cancers.. AIMS: DNA methylation has been shown to play an important role in breast cancer pathogenesis, but up until now it is not clear how the tissue components contribute to the overall methylation of the sample, because microdissection does not provide sufficient material for most standard methylation assays. METHODS: We developed a technology to analyse several methylation markers in a limited number of cells dissected from tissue sections. To evaluate the technology, we analysed, among others, the methylation markers PITX2, RASSF1A and TFF1 in 79 samples of three PITX2 methylation positive invasive ductal carcinomas. The microdissected samples were from the invasive part, the intraductal part, the stroma, tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, chest wall muscle, adipose tissue and healthy ducts. RESULTS: The multiplexed methylation analysis allows for the quantitative analysis of methylation patterns in microdissected samples with as few as 100 genome copies. In all analysed patients PITX2 and RASSF1A were highly methylated in invasive and intraductal carcinoma cells compared to other tissue components. TFF1 behaved inversely. PITX2 showed some methylation in normal adjacent breast tissue. The methylation of the individual markers varied little within one tissue type and between blocks. CONCLUSIONS: This technology is a powerful tool to analyse the methylation of multiple markers in different microdissected tissue components. Methylation patterns may differ significantly between different markers and tissue components. This technology may help to analyse different transitions states of breast and other cancers.

Integrins are cell surface receptors that mediate cell-cell/extracellular interactions and have shown an association with metastasis or transformation in several cancers. However, the correlation between the clinicopathological status of breast cancer and the altered integrin alpha4 status is not clear. In this study, we investigated DNA methylation of integrin alpha4 in breast cancer. We retrieved 351 cases of surgically resected breast cancer (290 invasive carcinoma and 61 intraductal carcinoma). Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to determine integrin alpha4 methylation status. Integrin alpha4 methylation was frequently observed in breast cancer specimens (145/351 cases, 41.3 %). In addition, DNA methylation of integrin alpha4 showed statistical correlation with HER2 positivity and higher histologic grade (p = 0.001, 0.008 in ductal carcinoma in situ and 0.003 in invasive ductal carcinoma). However, other clinicopathological data such as estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, metastasis, and TNM status showed no statistical correlation. Moreover, we found that the downregulated expression of integrin alpha4 in a heavily methylated breast cancer cell line (ZR-75) was restored by treatment with 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, implying transcriptional silencing by DNA methylation. We observed that integrin alpha4 methylation is associated with the histologic grade of tumors and lymph node metastasis. Also, this data supports a previous study that suggested integrin alpha4 and HER2 are involved in the same signaling pathway. DNA methylation of integrin alpha4 may be a poor prognostic factor which affects undifferentiated histologic change of breast cancer.. Integrins are cell surface receptors that mediate cell-cell/extracellular interactions and have shown an association with metastasis or transformation in several cancers. However, the correlation between the clinicopathological status of breast cancer and the altered integrin alpha4 status is not clear. In this study, we investigated DNA methylation of integrin alpha4 in breast cancer. We retrieved 351 cases of surgically resected breast cancer (290 invasive carcinoma and 61 intraductal carcinoma). Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to determine integrin alpha4 methylation status. Integrin alpha4 methylation was frequently observed in breast cancer specimens (145/351 cases, 41.3 %). In addition, DNA methylation of integrin alpha4 showed statistical correlation with HER2 positivity and higher histologic grade (p = 0.001, 0.008 in ductal carcinoma in situ and 0.003 in invasive ductal carcinoma). However, other clinicopathological data such as estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, metastasis, and TNM status showed no statistical correlation. Moreover, we found that the downregulated expression of integrin alpha4 in a heavily methylated breast cancer cell line (ZR-75) was restored by treatment with 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, implying transcriptional silencing by DNA methylation. We observed that integrin alpha4 methylation is associated with the histologic grade of tumors and lymph node metastasis. Also, this data supports a previous study that suggested integrin alpha4 and HER2 are involved in the same signaling pathway. DNA methylation of integrin alpha4 may be a poor prognostic factor which affects undifferentiated histologic change of breast cancer.

Mutations of the BRCA1 gene in tumor DNA from patients with sporadic breast cancer have not yet been observed. Nevertheless, BRCA1 activity is markedly decreased in invasive breast tumors. Previous reports have shown that hypermethylation of the promoter region is an alternative mechanism to mutation for the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. We examined the BRCA1 promoter region for hypermethylation by Southern blotting. Hypermethylation was observed in two of seven sporadic breast carcinomas but not in any normal tissues. The hypermethylation was not an artifact because a control region was unmethylated in the two tumors. Although not all tumors were hypermethylated, these observations are consistent with an important role for epigenetic mechanisms in human cancer.. Mutations of the BRCA1 gene in tumor DNA from patients with sporadic breast cancer have not yet been observed. Nevertheless, BRCA1 activity is markedly decreased in invasive breast tumors. Previous reports have shown that hypermethylation of the promoter region is an alternative mechanism to mutation for the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. We examined the BRCA1 promoter region for hypermethylation by Southern blotting. Hypermethylation was observed in two of seven sporadic breast carcinomas but not in any normal tissues. The hypermethylation was not an artifact because a control region was unmethylated in the two tumors. Although not all tumors were hypermethylated, these observations are consistent with an important role for epigenetic mechanisms in human cancer.

Breast cancer is a leading cause of death among females worldwide. However, the mechanisms of breast cancer remain largely unclear. RASSF10 is frequently methylated in certain types of human cancers. To understand the mechanism of RASSF10 in breast cancer, samples of breast cancer cell lines, primary cancer, breast tissue adjacent to cancer, and normal breast tissue were investigated in this study. Methylation specific PCR (MSP), flow cytometry, western blot, and siRNA knockdown assay were used. Complete methylation was found in MCF7, MDA-MB-435, and MDA-MB-468 cells, partial methylation was found in ZR75-1 cells, and unmethylation was revealed in SKBR3 cells. Loss of RASSF10 expression was found in MCF7, MDA-MB-435, and MDA-MB-468 cells, and high expression of RASSF10 was found in ZR75-1 and SKBR3 cells. The expression of RASSF10 was induced by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza) in MCF7, MDA-MB-435, and MDA-MB-468 cells. RASSF10 methylation was found in 77.8% (49/63) of primary breast cancer and 17.8% (8/45) of adjacent tissue samples. No methylation was found in normal breast tissue samples. Restoration of RASSF10 expression inhibited cell proliferation and induced G2/M phase arrest in MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cells. RASSF10 sensitized these cells to docetaxel. RASSF10 induced apoptosis and activated P53 signaling in breast cancer cells. In conclusion, RASSF10 is frequently methylated in human breast cancer and infrequently in adjacent tissue samples. RASSF10 methylation may serve as an early detective marker. The expression of RASSF10 is regulated by promoter region methylation. Since restoration of RASSF10 expression sensitized breast cancer cells to docetaxel, RASSF10 methylation is a potential docetaxel resistant marker. RASSF10 suppresses breast cancer growth by activating P53 signaling.. Breast cancer is a leading cause of death among females worldwide. However, the mechanisms of breast cancer remain largely unclear. RASSF10 is frequently methylated in certain types of human cancers. To understand the mechanism of RASSF10 in breast cancer, samples of breast cancer cell lines, primary cancer, breast tissue adjacent to cancer, and normal breast tissue were investigated in this study. Methylation specific PCR (MSP), flow cytometry, western blot, and siRNA knockdown assay were used. Complete methylation was found in MCF7, MDA-MB-435, and MDA-MB-468 cells, partial methylation was found in ZR75-1 cells, and unmethylation was revealed in SKBR3 cells. Loss of RASSF10 expression was found in MCF7, MDA-MB-435, and MDA-MB-468 cells, and high expression of RASSF10 was found in ZR75-1 and SKBR3 cells. The expression of RASSF10 was induced by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza) in MCF7, MDA-MB-435, and MDA-MB-468 cells. RASSF10 methylation was found in 77.8% (49/63) of primary breast cancer and 17.8% (8/45) of adjacent tissue samples. No methylation was found in normal breast tissue samples. Restoration of RASSF10 expression inhibited cell proliferation and induced G2/M phase arrest in MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cells. RASSF10 sensitized these cells to docetaxel. RASSF10 induced apoptosis and activated P53 signaling in breast cancer cells. In conclusion, RASSF10 is frequently methylated in human breast cancer and infrequently in adjacent tissue samples. RASSF10 methylation may serve as an early detective marker. The expression of RASSF10 is regulated by promoter region methylation. Since restoration of RASSF10 expression sensitized breast cancer cells to docetaxel, RASSF10 methylation is a potential docetaxel resistant marker. RASSF10 suppresses breast cancer growth by activating P53 signaling.

The present study aimed to investigate the effect of luteolin on the methylation of opioid binding protein/cell adhesion molecule (OPCML) in breast cancer cells, as well as its underlying mechanism of action. Human breast cancer cell lines BT474 and MCF-7 were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. The cells were treated with 0-30 micromol/l luteolin prior to investigation. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis were used to determine the mRNA and protein expression, respectively. High performance liquid chromatography and electrosprary ionization-mass spectrometry was used to analyze the methylation of the OPCML promoter region and whole genome. The methylation activity in the cell nucleus was determined using a DNA methyltransferase catalytic test. ELISA analysis was used to detect changes in the activity of transcription factors Sp1 and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB. An MTT assay was performed to determine cell proliferation, while flow cytometry was used to detect cell cycle stage and apoptosis. Luteolin effectively upregulated the expression of OPCML in breast cancer cells. Luteolin activated OPCML by reducing intracellular methylation levels. Luteolin downregulated intracellular methylation levels by decreasing Sp1 and NF-kappaB activities. Luteolin affected the expression of DNMT1 and OPCML by downregulating Sp1 activity. Luteolin inhibited the proliferation and induced the apoptosis of BT474 and MCF-7 cells. The results of the present study suggest that luteolin inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells by decreasing the methylation and upregulating the expression of the OPCML gene.. The present study aimed to investigate the effect of luteolin on the methylation of opioid binding protein/cell adhesion molecule (OPCML) in breast cancer cells, as well as its underlying mechanism of action. Human breast cancer cell lines BT474 and MCF-7 were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. The cells were treated with 0-30 micromol/l luteolin prior to investigation. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis were used to determine the mRNA and protein expression, respectively. High performance liquid chromatography and electrosprary ionization-mass spectrometry was used to analyze the methylation of the OPCML promoter region and whole genome. The methylation activity in the cell nucleus was determined using a DNA methyltransferase catalytic test. ELISA analysis was used to detect changes in the activity of transcription factors Sp1 and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB. An MTT assay was performed to determine cell proliferation, while flow cytometry was used to detect cell cycle stage and apoptosis. Luteolin effectively upregulated the expression of OPCML in breast cancer cells. Luteolin activated OPCML by reducing intracellular methylation levels. Luteolin downregulated intracellular methylation levels by decreasing Sp1 and NF-kappaB activities. Luteolin affected the expression of DNMT1 and OPCML by downregulating Sp1 activity. Luteolin inhibited the proliferation and induced the apoptosis of BT474 and MCF-7 cells. The results of the present study suggest that luteolin inhibits the growth of breast cancer cells by decreasing the methylation and upregulating the expression of the OPCML gene.

OBJECTIVES: It is unclear whether 2-pore domain potassium channels are novel molecular markers with differential expression related to biologically aggressive triple-negative type breast tumors. Our objective was to systematically evaluate associations of 2-pore domain potassium channel gene expression and DNA methylation with triple-negative subtype in The Cancer Genome Atlas invasive breast cancer dataset. Methylation and expression data for all fifteen 2-pore domain potassium family genes were examined for 1040 women, and associations with triple-negative subtype (vs. luminal A) were evaluated using age/race adjusted generalized-linear models, with Bonferroni-corrected significance thresholds. Subtype associated CpG loci were evaluated for functionality related to expression using Spearman's correlation. RESULTS: Overexpression of KCNK5, KCNK9 and KCNK12, and underexpression of KCNK6 and KCNK15, were significantly associated with triple-negative subtype (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.0033). A total of 195 (114 hypomethylated and 81 hypermethylated) CpG loci were found to be significantly associated with triple-negative subtype (Bonferroni-corrected p < 8.22 x 10(-8)). Significantly negatively correlated expression patterns that were differentially observed in triple-negative vs. luminal A subtype were demonstrated for: KCNK2 (gene body: cg04923840, cg13916421), KCNK5 (gene body: cg05255811, cg18705155, cg09130674, cg21388745, cg00859574) and KCNK9 (TSS1500: cg21415530, cg12175729; KCNK9/TRAPPC9 intergenic region: cg17336929, cg25900813, cg03919980). CpG loci listed for KCNK5 and KCNK9 all showed relative hypomethylation for probability of triple-negative vs. luminal A subtype. Triple-negative subtype was associated with distinct 2-pore domain potassium channel expression patterns. Both KCNK5 and KCNK9 overexpression appeared to be functionally related to CpG loci hypomethylation.. OBJECTIVES: It is unclear whether 2-pore domain potassium channels are novel molecular markers with differential expression related to biologically aggressive triple-negative type breast tumors. Our objective was to systematically evaluate associations of 2-pore domain potassium channel gene expression and DNA methylation with triple-negative subtype in The Cancer Genome Atlas invasive breast cancer dataset. Methylation and expression data for all fifteen 2-pore domain potassium family genes were examined for 1040 women, and associations with triple-negative subtype (vs. luminal A) were evaluated using age/race adjusted generalized-linear models, with Bonferroni-corrected significance thresholds. Subtype associated CpG loci were evaluated for functionality related to expression using Spearman's correlation. RESULTS: Overexpression of KCNK5, KCNK9 and KCNK12, and underexpression of KCNK6 and KCNK15, were significantly associated with triple-negative subtype (Bonferroni-corrected p < 0.0033). A total of 195 (114 hypomethylated and 81 hypermethylated) CpG loci were found to be significantly associated with triple-negative subtype (Bonferroni-corrected p < 8.22 x 10(-8)). Significantly negatively correlated expression patterns that were differentially observed in triple-negative vs. luminal A subtype were demonstrated for: KCNK2 (gene body: cg04923840, cg13916421), KCNK5 (gene body: cg05255811, cg18705155, cg09130674, cg21388745, cg00859574) and KCNK9 (TSS1500: cg21415530, cg12175729; KCNK9/TRAPPC9 intergenic region: cg17336929, cg25900813, cg03919980). CpG loci listed for KCNK5 and KCNK9 all showed relative hypomethylation for probability of triple-negative vs. luminal A subtype. Triple-negative subtype was associated with distinct 2-pore domain potassium channel expression patterns. Both KCNK5 and KCNK9 overexpression appeared to be functionally related to CpG loci hypomethylation.

PURPOSE: Human DOC-2/DAB2 interactive protein (hDAB2IP) gene is a novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating family and has been demonstrated to be a tumor suppressor gene inactivated by methylation in prostate cancer. We analyzed methylation and expression status of hDAB2IP in breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The promoter region of hDAB2IP was divided into two regions (m2a and m2b) following our previous report on prostate cancer, and methylation status was determined in breast cancer cell lines with bisulfited DNA sequencing. Expression was semiquantified with real-time reverse transcription-PCR to find that aberrant methylation showed the inverse relationship with expression. On the basis of sequence data, we developed methylation-specific PCR for m2a and m2b regions and applied to samples. RESULTS: Aberrant methylation was detected in 11 of 25 breast cancer cell lines (44%) and 15 of 39 primary tumors (38%) at the m2a region and in 12 of 25 cell lines (48%) and 13 of 39 tumors (33%) at the m2b region. In addition, gene expression was restored in methylated cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, confirming that methylation caused gene down-regulation. We also examined the relationship between hDAB2IP methylation and clinicopathologic features in primary tumors and found that methylation in the m2b region was associated with progressive nodal status of tumors. CONCLUSIONS: We developed methylation-specific PCR for hDAB2IP and examined its methylation status in breast cancer. Our results demonstrate that hDAB2IP methylation frequently is present in breast cancer and plays a key role in hDAB2IP inactivation, suggesting the relationship between hDAB2IP methylation and lymph node metastasis of breast cancer.. PURPOSE: Human DOC-2/DAB2 interactive protein (hDAB2IP) gene is a novel member of the Ras GTPase-activating family and has been demonstrated to be a tumor suppressor gene inactivated by methylation in prostate cancer. We analyzed methylation and expression status of hDAB2IP in breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The promoter region of hDAB2IP was divided into two regions (m2a and m2b) following our previous report on prostate cancer, and methylation status was determined in breast cancer cell lines with bisulfited DNA sequencing. Expression was semiquantified with real-time reverse transcription-PCR to find that aberrant methylation showed the inverse relationship with expression. On the basis of sequence data, we developed methylation-specific PCR for m2a and m2b regions and applied to samples. RESULTS: Aberrant methylation was detected in 11 of 25 breast cancer cell lines (44%) and 15 of 39 primary tumors (38%) at the m2a region and in 12 of 25 cell lines (48%) and 13 of 39 tumors (33%) at the m2b region. In addition, gene expression was restored in methylated cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, confirming that methylation caused gene down-regulation. We also examined the relationship between hDAB2IP methylation and clinicopathologic features in primary tumors and found that methylation in the m2b region was associated with progressive nodal status of tumors. CONCLUSIONS: We developed methylation-specific PCR for hDAB2IP and examined its methylation status in breast cancer. Our results demonstrate that hDAB2IP methylation frequently is present in breast cancer and plays a key role in hDAB2IP inactivation, suggesting the relationship between hDAB2IP methylation and lymph node metastasis of breast cancer.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) is a growth factor that is involved in the development and progression of various types of cancer. However, the epigenetic regulation of the expression of BMP2 and the association between BMP2 expression and drug resistance in breast cancer remains to be elucidated. The present study reported that the expression of BMP2 was significantly decreased in primary breast cancer samples and the MCF7/ADR breast cancer mulitdrug resistance cell line, which was closely associated with its promoter DNA methylation status. The expression of BMP2 in MCF7/ADR cells markedly increased when treated with 5Aza2'deoxycytidine. Knockdown of BMP2 by specific small interfering RNA enhanced the chemoresistance of the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. These findings indicated that epigenetic silencing of BMP2 in breast cancer may be involved in breast cancer progression and drug resistance, and provided a novel prognostic marker and therapeutic strategy for breast cancer.. Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) is a growth factor that is involved in the development and progression of various types of cancer. However, the epigenetic regulation of the expression of BMP2 and the association between BMP2 expression and drug resistance in breast cancer remains to be elucidated. The present study reported that the expression of BMP2 was significantly decreased in primary breast cancer samples and the MCF7/ADR breast cancer mulitdrug resistance cell line, which was closely associated with its promoter DNA methylation status. The expression of BMP2 in MCF7/ADR cells markedly increased when treated with 5Aza2'deoxycytidine. Knockdown of BMP2 by specific small interfering RNA enhanced the chemoresistance of the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. These findings indicated that epigenetic silencing of BMP2 in breast cancer may be involved in breast cancer progression and drug resistance, and provided a novel prognostic marker and therapeutic strategy for breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation can mimic the effects of germline mutations in cancer predisposition genes. Recently, we identified twenty-four heritable methylation marks associated with breast cancer risk. As breast and prostate cancer share genetic risk factors, including rare, high-risk mutations (eg, in BRCA2), we hypothesized that some of these heritable methylation marks might also be associated with the risk of prostate cancer. METHODS: We studied 869 incident prostate cancers (430 aggressive and 439 non-aggressive) and 869 matched controls nested within a prospective cohort study. DNA methylation was measured in pre-diagnostic blood samples using the Illumina Infinium HM450K BeadChip. Conditional logistic regression models, adjusted for prostate cancer risk factors and blood cell composition, were used to estimate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for the association between the 24 methylation marks and the risk of prostate cancer. RESULTS: Five methylation marks within the VTRNA2-1 promoter region (cg06536614, cg00124993, cg26328633, cg25340688, and cg26896946), and one in the body of CLGN (cg22901919) were associated with the risk of prostate cancer. In stratified analyses, the five VTRNA2-1 marks were associated with the risk of aggressive prostate cancer. CONCLUSIONS: This work highlights a potentially important new area of investigation for prostate cancer susceptibility and adds to our knowledge about shared risk factors for breast and prostate cancer.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation can mimic the effects of germline mutations in cancer predisposition genes. Recently, we identified twenty-four heritable methylation marks associated with breast cancer risk. As breast and prostate cancer share genetic risk factors, including rare, high-risk mutations (eg, in BRCA2), we hypothesized that some of these heritable methylation marks might also be associated with the risk of prostate cancer. METHODS: We studied 869 incident prostate cancers (430 aggressive and 439 non-aggressive) and 869 matched controls nested within a prospective cohort study. DNA methylation was measured in pre-diagnostic blood samples using the Illumina Infinium HM450K BeadChip. Conditional logistic regression models, adjusted for prostate cancer risk factors and blood cell composition, were used to estimate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for the association between the 24 methylation marks and the risk of prostate cancer. RESULTS: Five methylation marks within the VTRNA2-1 promoter region (cg06536614, cg00124993, cg26328633, cg25340688, and cg26896946), and one in the body of CLGN (cg22901919) were associated with the risk of prostate cancer. In stratified analyses, the five VTRNA2-1 marks were associated with the risk of aggressive prostate cancer. CONCLUSIONS: This work highlights a potentially important new area of investigation for prostate cancer susceptibility and adds to our knowledge about shared risk factors for breast and prostate cancer.

. 
Breast cancer is caused by progressive genetic alterations and epigenetic changes that trigger tumor development. Among the epigenetic alterations descried in breast cancer, DNA promoter methylation has been extensively studied and observed in genes involved in several critical signaling pathways that initiate and promote breast tumorigenesis. In addition to DNA hypermethylation, global methylation levels have been observed to decrease with breast cancer progression. In close connection with DNA methylation changes, histone modifications, especially the acetylation and methylation of histone lysines, play an essential role in the nucleosomes remodeling and gene expression regulation in breast cancer.. Breast cancer is caused by progressive genetic alterations and epigenetic changes that trigger tumor development. Among the epigenetic alterations descried in breast cancer, DNA promoter methylation has been extensively studied and observed in genes involved in several critical signaling pathways that initiate and promote breast tumorigenesis. In addition to DNA hypermethylation, global methylation levels have been observed to decrease with breast cancer progression. In close connection with DNA methylation changes, histone modifications, especially the acetylation and methylation of histone lysines, play an essential role in the nucleosomes remodeling and gene expression regulation in breast cancer.

INTRODUCTION: We have previously identified a rare subpopulation of variant human mammary epithelial cells (vHMEC) with repressed p16INK4A that exist in disease-free women yet display premalignant properties, suggesting that they have engaged the process of malignant transformation. In order to gain insight into the molecular alterations required for vHMEC to progress to malignancy, and to characterize the epigenetic events associated with early progression, we examined the effect of oncogenic stress on the behavior of these cells. METHODS: HMEC that express p16INK4A and vHMEC that do not, were transduced with constitutively active Ha-rasV12 and subsequently exposed to serum to determine whether signals from the cellular microenvironment could cooperate with ras to promote the malignant transformation of vHMEC. Epigenetic alterations were assessed using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). RESULTS: vHMEC expressing Ha-rasV12 (vHMEC-ras) bypassed the classic proliferative arrest that has been previously documented in normal fibroblasts following oncogenic stress, and that we also observe here in normal HMEC. Moreover, vHMEC-ras cells exhibited many additional alterations that are observed during progression to malignancy such as the generation of chromosomal abnormalities, upregulation of telomerase activity, immortalization following exposure to serum, and anchorage-independent growth, but they did not form tumors following orthotopic injection in vivo. Associated with their early progression to malignancy was an increase in the number of genes methylated, two of which (RASSF1A and SFRP1) were also methylated in other immortalized mammary cell lines as well as in breast cancer cells and tissues. CONCLUSIONS: We have characterized a mammary progression model that recapitulates molecular and methylation alterations observed in many breast cancers. Our data suggest that concomitant methylation of RASSF1A and SFRP1 marks an early event in mammary transformation and may thus have prognostic potential.. INTRODUCTION: We have previously identified a rare subpopulation of variant human mammary epithelial cells (vHMEC) with repressed p16INK4A that exist in disease-free women yet display premalignant properties, suggesting that they have engaged the process of malignant transformation. In order to gain insight into the molecular alterations required for vHMEC to progress to malignancy, and to characterize the epigenetic events associated with early progression, we examined the effect of oncogenic stress on the behavior of these cells. METHODS: HMEC that express p16INK4A and vHMEC that do not, were transduced with constitutively active Ha-rasV12 and subsequently exposed to serum to determine whether signals from the cellular microenvironment could cooperate with ras to promote the malignant transformation of vHMEC. Epigenetic alterations were assessed using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR). RESULTS: vHMEC expressing Ha-rasV12 (vHMEC-ras) bypassed the classic proliferative arrest that has been previously documented in normal fibroblasts following oncogenic stress, and that we also observe here in normal HMEC. Moreover, vHMEC-ras cells exhibited many additional alterations that are observed during progression to malignancy such as the generation of chromosomal abnormalities, upregulation of telomerase activity, immortalization following exposure to serum, and anchorage-independent growth, but they did not form tumors following orthotopic injection in vivo. Associated with their early progression to malignancy was an increase in the number of genes methylated, two of which (RASSF1A and SFRP1) were also methylated in other immortalized mammary cell lines as well as in breast cancer cells and tissues. CONCLUSIONS: We have characterized a mammary progression model that recapitulates molecular and methylation alterations observed in many breast cancers. Our data suggest that concomitant methylation of RASSF1A and SFRP1 marks an early event in mammary transformation and may thus have prognostic potential.

The active acquisition of epigenetic changes is a poorly understood but important process in development, differentiation, and disease. Our work has shown that repression of the p16/pRb pathway in human epithelial cells, a condition common to stem cells and many tumor cells, induces dynamic epigenetic remodeling resulting in the targeted methylation of a selected group of CpG islands. We hypothesized that cells in this epigenetically plastic state could be programmed by the microenvironment to acquire epigenetic changes associated with tumorigenesis. Here, we describe an in vitro model system where epigenetically plastic cells were placed in an environment that induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and led to a program of acquired de novo DNA methylation at targeted sites. In this model, we found that repression of E-cadherin transcription preceded the subsequent acquisition of methylated CpG sites. Furthermore, the induction of EMT was accompanied by de novo methylation of several other gene promoters, including those of the estrogen receptor and Twist. These data demonstrate that signals from the microenvironment can induce phenotypic and gene expression changes associated with targeted de novo epigenetic alterations important in tumor progression, and that these alterations occur through a deterministic, rather than stochastic, mechanism. Given the dynamic epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in these cells, DNA methylation profiles observed in human tumors may reflect the history of environmental exposures during the genesis of a tumor.. The active acquisition of epigenetic changes is a poorly understood but important process in development, differentiation, and disease. Our work has shown that repression of the p16/pRb pathway in human epithelial cells, a condition common to stem cells and many tumor cells, induces dynamic epigenetic remodeling resulting in the targeted methylation of a selected group of CpG islands. We hypothesized that cells in this epigenetically plastic state could be programmed by the microenvironment to acquire epigenetic changes associated with tumorigenesis. Here, we describe an in vitro model system where epigenetically plastic cells were placed in an environment that induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and led to a program of acquired de novo DNA methylation at targeted sites. In this model, we found that repression of E-cadherin transcription preceded the subsequent acquisition of methylated CpG sites. Furthermore, the induction of EMT was accompanied by de novo methylation of several other gene promoters, including those of the estrogen receptor and Twist. These data demonstrate that signals from the microenvironment can induce phenotypic and gene expression changes associated with targeted de novo epigenetic alterations important in tumor progression, and that these alterations occur through a deterministic, rather than stochastic, mechanism. Given the dynamic epigenetic reprogramming that occurs in these cells, DNA methylation profiles observed in human tumors may reflect the history of environmental exposures during the genesis of a tumor.

Self-renewal and differentiation are two epigenetic programs that regulate stem cells fate. Dysregulation of these two programs leads to the development of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Recent evidence suggests that CSCs are relatively resistant to conventional therapies and responsible for metastasis formation. Deciphering these processes will help understand oncogenesis and allow the development of new targeted therapies. Here, we have used a whole genome promoter microarray to establish the DNA methylation portraits of breast cancer stem cells (bCSCs) and non-bCSCs. A total of 68 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were more hypomethylated in bCSCs than in non-bCSCs. Using a differentiation assay we demonstrated that DMRs are rapidly hypermethylated within the first 6 hours following induction of CSC differentiation whereas the cells reached the steady-state within 6 days, suggesting that these DMRs are linked to early CSC epigenetic regulation. These DMRs were significantly enriched in genes coding for TGF-beta signaling-related proteins. Interestingly, DMRs hypomethylation was correlated to an overexpression of TGF-beta signaling genes in a series of 109 breast tumors. Moreover, patients with tumors harboring the bCSC DMRs signature had a worse prognosis than those with non-bCSC DMRs signature. Our results show that bCSCs have a distinct DNA methylation landscape with TGF-beta signaling as a key epigenetic regulator of bCSCs differentiation.. Self-renewal and differentiation are two epigenetic programs that regulate stem cells fate. Dysregulation of these two programs leads to the development of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Recent evidence suggests that CSCs are relatively resistant to conventional therapies and responsible for metastasis formation. Deciphering these processes will help understand oncogenesis and allow the development of new targeted therapies. Here, we have used a whole genome promoter microarray to establish the DNA methylation portraits of breast cancer stem cells (bCSCs) and non-bCSCs. A total of 68 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were more hypomethylated in bCSCs than in non-bCSCs. Using a differentiation assay we demonstrated that DMRs are rapidly hypermethylated within the first 6 hours following induction of CSC differentiation whereas the cells reached the steady-state within 6 days, suggesting that these DMRs are linked to early CSC epigenetic regulation. These DMRs were significantly enriched in genes coding for TGF-beta signaling-related proteins. Interestingly, DMRs hypomethylation was correlated to an overexpression of TGF-beta signaling genes in a series of 109 breast tumors. Moreover, patients with tumors harboring the bCSC DMRs signature had a worse prognosis than those with non-bCSC DMRs signature. Our results show that bCSCs have a distinct DNA methylation landscape with TGF-beta signaling as a key epigenetic regulator of bCSCs differentiation.

Aberrant expression of immune checkpoints (ICs) in cancer creates an immunosuppressive microenvironment, which supports immune evasion of tumor cells. We have recently reported that epigenetic modifications are critical for ICs expression in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of primary breast cancer (PBC) and colorectal cancer (CRC). Herein, we investigated transcriptomic expression of ICs (PD-1, CTLA-4, LAG-3, TIM-3, TIGIT) and PD-L1 in peripheral blood of PBC and CRC patients, compared to healthy donors (HD). We found that expressions of TIM-3, TIGIT, PD-L1 were significantly upregulated, while LAG-3 expression was downregulated in peripheral blood of PBC and CRC patients. Demethylation enzymes TET2 and TET3 were also upregulated. In addition, promoter DNA methylation status of PD-1 was significantly hypermethylated, while PD-L1 was hypomethylated in PBC and CRC patients. Furthermore, TIGIT was significantly hypomethylated only in CRC patients. Remarkably, promoter methylation status of LAG-3, TIGIT and PD-L1 was in concordance with transcriptomic expression in CRC: the more the hypomethylation, the higher the expression. In comparison, we found that CTLA-4, TIM-3, TIGIT and PD-L1 in PBC, and CTLA-4 in CRC patients were significantly upregulated in peripheral blood, compared with tumor tissues of the same patients. However, demethylation status of all ICs was higher in TT, except for TIGIT in PBC, and CTLA-4 in CRC patients. These data indicate that the underlying mechanisms behind peripheral upregulation of PD-L1 and TIGIT in cancer patients could be due to aberrant promoter methylation profile. Moreover, demethylation inhibitors together with anti-PD-L1/anti-TIGIT could be a more efficient therapeutic strategy in cancer patients.. Aberrant expression of immune checkpoints (ICs) in cancer creates an immunosuppressive microenvironment, which supports immune evasion of tumor cells. We have recently reported that epigenetic modifications are critical for ICs expression in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of primary breast cancer (PBC) and colorectal cancer (CRC). Herein, we investigated transcriptomic expression of ICs (PD-1, CTLA-4, LAG-3, TIM-3, TIGIT) and PD-L1 in peripheral blood of PBC and CRC patients, compared to healthy donors (HD). We found that expressions of TIM-3, TIGIT, PD-L1 were significantly upregulated, while LAG-3 expression was downregulated in peripheral blood of PBC and CRC patients. Demethylation enzymes TET2 and TET3 were also upregulated. In addition, promoter DNA methylation status of PD-1 was significantly hypermethylated, while PD-L1 was hypomethylated in PBC and CRC patients. Furthermore, TIGIT was significantly hypomethylated only in CRC patients. Remarkably, promoter methylation status of LAG-3, TIGIT and PD-L1 was in concordance with transcriptomic expression in CRC: the more the hypomethylation, the higher the expression. In comparison, we found that CTLA-4, TIM-3, TIGIT and PD-L1 in PBC, and CTLA-4 in CRC patients were significantly upregulated in peripheral blood, compared with tumor tissues of the same patients. However, demethylation status of all ICs was higher in TT, except for TIGIT in PBC, and CTLA-4 in CRC patients. These data indicate that the underlying mechanisms behind peripheral upregulation of PD-L1 and TIGIT in cancer patients could be due to aberrant promoter methylation profile. Moreover, demethylation inhibitors together with anti-PD-L1/anti-TIGIT could be a more efficient therapeutic strategy in cancer patients.

The CA microsatellite repeat marker, D7S522, is located at the center of a approximately 1000 kb smallest common deleted region that is lost in many forms of human cancer. It has been proposed that a putative tumor suppressor gene lies in close proximity to D7S522, within this smallest common deleted region. However, the genes located in proximity to D7S522 have remained elusive. Recently, we identified five independent BAC clones (approximately 100-200 kb) containing D7S522 and the human genes encoding caveolins 1 and 2. Here, we present the detailed organization of the caveolin locus and its relationship to D7S522, as deduced using a shot-gun sequencing approach. We derived two adjacent contigs for a total coverage of approximately 250 kb. Analysis of these contigs reveals that D7S522 is located approximately 67 kb upstream of the caveolin-2 gene and that the caveolin-2 gene is located approximately 19 kb upstream of the caveolin-1 gene, providing for the first time a detailed genetic map of this region. Further sequence analysis reveals many interesting features of the caveolin genes; these include the intron-exon boundaries and several previously unrecognized CA repeats that lie within or in close proximity to the caveolin genes. The first and second exons of both caveolin genes are embedded within CpG islands. These results suggest that regulation of caveolin gene expression may be controlled, in part, by methylation of these CpG regions. In support of this notion, we show here that the CGs in the 5' promoter region of the caveolin-1 gene are functionally methylated in two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and T-47D) that fail to express the caveolin-1 protein. In contrast, the same CGs in cultured normal human mammary epithelial cells (NHMECs) are non-methylated and these cells express high levels of the caveolin-1 protein. Comparison of the human locus with the same locus in the pufferfish Fugu rubripes reveals that the overall organization of the caveolin-1/-2 locus is conserved from pufferfish to man. In conclusion, our current studies provide a systematic basis for diagnostically evaluating the potential deletion, mutation, or methylation of the caveolin genes in a variety of human tumors.. The CA microsatellite repeat marker, D7S522, is located at the center of a approximately 1000 kb smallest common deleted region that is lost in many forms of human cancer. It has been proposed that a putative tumor suppressor gene lies in close proximity to D7S522, within this smallest common deleted region. However, the genes located in proximity to D7S522 have remained elusive. Recently, we identified five independent BAC clones (approximately 100-200 kb) containing D7S522 and the human genes encoding caveolins 1 and 2. Here, we present the detailed organization of the caveolin locus and its relationship to D7S522, as deduced using a shot-gun sequencing approach. We derived two adjacent contigs for a total coverage of approximately 250 kb. Analysis of these contigs reveals that D7S522 is located approximately 67 kb upstream of the caveolin-2 gene and that the caveolin-2 gene is located approximately 19 kb upstream of the caveolin-1 gene, providing for the first time a detailed genetic map of this region. Further sequence analysis reveals many interesting features of the caveolin genes; these include the intron-exon boundaries and several previously unrecognized CA repeats that lie within or in close proximity to the caveolin genes. The first and second exons of both caveolin genes are embedded within CpG islands. These results suggest that regulation of caveolin gene expression may be controlled, in part, by methylation of these CpG regions. In support of this notion, we show here that the CGs in the 5' promoter region of the caveolin-1 gene are functionally methylated in two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and T-47D) that fail to express the caveolin-1 protein. In contrast, the same CGs in cultured normal human mammary epithelial cells (NHMECs) are non-methylated and these cells express high levels of the caveolin-1 protein. Comparison of the human locus with the same locus in the pufferfish Fugu rubripes reveals that the overall organization of the caveolin-1/-2 locus is conserved from pufferfish to man. In conclusion, our current studies provide a systematic basis for diagnostically evaluating the potential deletion, mutation, or methylation of the caveolin genes in a variety of human tumors.

Background. Response gene to complement 32 (RGC32), induced by activation of complements, has been characterized as a cell cycle regulator; however, its role in carcinogenesis is still controversial. In the present study we compared RGC32 promoter methylation patterns and mRNA expression in breast cancerous tissues and adjacent normal tissues. Materials and Methods. Sixty-three breast cancer tissues and 63 adjacent nonneoplastic tissues were included in our study. Design. Nested methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (Nested-MSP) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) were used to determine RGC32 promoter methylation status and its mRNA expression levels, respectively. Results. RGC32 methylation pattern was not different between breast cancerous tissue and adjacent nonneoplastic tissue (OR = 2.30, 95% CI = 0.95-5.54). However, qPCR analysis displayed higher levels of RGC32 mRNA in breast cancerous tissues than in noncancerous tissues (1.073 versus 0.959; P = 0.001), irrespective of the promoter methylation status. The expression levels and promoter methylation of RGC32 were not correlated with any of patients' clinical characteristics (P > 0.05). Conclusion. Our findings confirmed upregulation of RGC32 in breast cancerous tumors, but it was not associated with promoter methylation patterns.. Background. Response gene to complement 32 (RGC32), induced by activation of complements, has been characterized as a cell cycle regulator; however, its role in carcinogenesis is still controversial. In the present study we compared RGC32 promoter methylation patterns and mRNA expression in breast cancerous tissues and adjacent normal tissues. Materials and Methods. Sixty-three breast cancer tissues and 63 adjacent nonneoplastic tissues were included in our study. Design. Nested methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (Nested-MSP) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) were used to determine RGC32 promoter methylation status and its mRNA expression levels, respectively. Results. RGC32 methylation pattern was not different between breast cancerous tissue and adjacent nonneoplastic tissue (OR = 2.30, 95% CI = 0.95-5.54). However, qPCR analysis displayed higher levels of RGC32 mRNA in breast cancerous tissues than in noncancerous tissues (1.073 versus 0.959; P = 0.001), irrespective of the promoter methylation status. The expression levels and promoter methylation of RGC32 were not correlated with any of patients' clinical characteristics (P > 0.05). Conclusion. Our findings confirmed upregulation of RGC32 in breast cancerous tumors, but it was not associated with promoter methylation patterns.

BACKGROUND: DNA from archival formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue is an invaluable resource for genome-wide methylation studies although concerns about poor quality may limit its use. In this study, we compared DNA methylation profiles of breast tumors using DNA from fresh-frozen (FF) tissues and three types of matched FFPE samples. RESULTS: For 9/10 patients, correlation and unsupervised clustering analysis revealed that the FF and FFPE samples were consistently correlated with each other and clustered into distinct subgroups. Greater than 84% of the top 100 loci previously shown to differentiate ER+ and ER- tumors in FF tissues were also FFPE DML. Weighted Correlation Gene Network Analyses (WCGNA) grouped the DML loci into 16 modules in FF tissue, with ~85% of the module membership preserved across tissue types. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Restored FFPE and matched FF samples were profiled using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450K platform. Methylation levels (beta-values) across all loci and the top 100 loci previously shown to differentiate tumors by estrogen receptor status (ER+ or ER-) in a larger FF study, were compared between matched FF and FFPE samples using Pearson's correlation, hierarchical clustering and WCGNA. Positive predictive values and sensitivity levels for detecting differentially methylated loci (DML) in FF samples were calculated in an independent FFPE cohort. CONCLUSIONS: FFPE breast tumors samples show lower overall detection of DMLs versus FF, however FFPE and FF DMLs compare favorably. These results support the emerging consensus that the 450K platform can be employed to investigate epigenetics in large sets of archival FFPE tissues.. BACKGROUND: DNA from archival formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue is an invaluable resource for genome-wide methylation studies although concerns about poor quality may limit its use. In this study, we compared DNA methylation profiles of breast tumors using DNA from fresh-frozen (FF) tissues and three types of matched FFPE samples. RESULTS: For 9/10 patients, correlation and unsupervised clustering analysis revealed that the FF and FFPE samples were consistently correlated with each other and clustered into distinct subgroups. Greater than 84% of the top 100 loci previously shown to differentiate ER+ and ER- tumors in FF tissues were also FFPE DML. Weighted Correlation Gene Network Analyses (WCGNA) grouped the DML loci into 16 modules in FF tissue, with ~85% of the module membership preserved across tissue types. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Restored FFPE and matched FF samples were profiled using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450K platform. Methylation levels (beta-values) across all loci and the top 100 loci previously shown to differentiate tumors by estrogen receptor status (ER+ or ER-) in a larger FF study, were compared between matched FF and FFPE samples using Pearson's correlation, hierarchical clustering and WCGNA. Positive predictive values and sensitivity levels for detecting differentially methylated loci (DML) in FF samples were calculated in an independent FFPE cohort. CONCLUSIONS: FFPE breast tumors samples show lower overall detection of DMLs versus FF, however FFPE and FF DMLs compare favorably. These results support the emerging consensus that the 450K platform can be employed to investigate epigenetics in large sets of archival FFPE tissues.

BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor gene (TSG) methylation is identified more frequently in random periareolar fine needle aspiration samples from women at high risk for breast cancer than women at lower risk. It is not known whether TSG methylation or atypia in nipple duct lavage (NDL) samples is related to predicted breast cancer risk. METHODS: 514 NDL samples obtained from 150 women selected to represent a wide range of breast cancer risk were evaluated cytologically and by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR for methylation of cyclin D2, APC, HIN1, RASSF1A, and RAR-beta2. RESULTS: Based on methylation patterns and cytology, NDL retrieved cancer cells from only 9% of breasts ipsilateral to a breast cancer. Methylation of >/=2 genes correlated with marked atypia by univariate analysis, but not multivariate analysis, that adjusted for sample cellularity and risk group classification. Both marked atypia and TSG methylation independently predicted abundant cellularity in multivariate analyses. Discrimination between Gail lower-risk ducts and Gail high-risk ducts was similar for marked atypia [odds ratio (OR), 3.48; P = 0.06] and measures of TSG methylation (OR, 3.51; P = 0.03). However, marked atypia provided better discrimination between Gail lower-risk ducts and ducts contralateral to a breast cancer (OR, 6.91; P = 0.003, compared with methylation OR, 4.21; P = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: TSG methylation in NDL samples does not predict marked atypia after correcting for sample cellularity and risk group classification. Rather, both methylation and marked atypia are independently associated with highly cellular samples, Gail model risk classifications, and a personal history of breast cancer. This suggests the existence of related, but independent, pathogenic pathways in breast epithelium.. BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor gene (TSG) methylation is identified more frequently in random periareolar fine needle aspiration samples from women at high risk for breast cancer than women at lower risk. It is not known whether TSG methylation or atypia in nipple duct lavage (NDL) samples is related to predicted breast cancer risk. METHODS: 514 NDL samples obtained from 150 women selected to represent a wide range of breast cancer risk were evaluated cytologically and by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR for methylation of cyclin D2, APC, HIN1, RASSF1A, and RAR-beta2. RESULTS: Based on methylation patterns and cytology, NDL retrieved cancer cells from only 9% of breasts ipsilateral to a breast cancer. Methylation of >/=2 genes correlated with marked atypia by univariate analysis, but not multivariate analysis, that adjusted for sample cellularity and risk group classification. Both marked atypia and TSG methylation independently predicted abundant cellularity in multivariate analyses. Discrimination between Gail lower-risk ducts and Gail high-risk ducts was similar for marked atypia [odds ratio (OR), 3.48; P = 0.06] and measures of TSG methylation (OR, 3.51; P = 0.03). However, marked atypia provided better discrimination between Gail lower-risk ducts and ducts contralateral to a breast cancer (OR, 6.91; P = 0.003, compared with methylation OR, 4.21; P = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: TSG methylation in NDL samples does not predict marked atypia after correcting for sample cellularity and risk group classification. Rather, both methylation and marked atypia are independently associated with highly cellular samples, Gail model risk classifications, and a personal history of breast cancer. This suggests the existence of related, but independent, pathogenic pathways in breast epithelium.

BACKGROUND: Many established breast cancer risk factors are related to the timing and duration of exposure to reproductive hormones, which are known to drive breast epithelial cell proliferation. The epigenetic molecular clock hypothesis suggests that CpG island methylation records the cell division history of benign epithelium. In proliferative epithelium, such as breast, this may provide an individualized cell-based measure of cancer risk. METHODS: Methylation of cyclin D2, APC, HIN1, RASSF1A, and RAR-beta2 was measured by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR in 290 benign and malignant breast epithelial cell samples obtained by palpation-directed fine-needle aspiration biopsy from 164 women. Univariate, multivariate, and unsupervised cluster analysis was used to establish the relationship between TSG methylation and a personal history of breast cancer, predicted breast cancer risk, and specific breast cancer risk factors. RESULTS: RASSF1A methylation was highly correlated with breast cancer risk [odds ratio (OR), 5.28; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.95-14.32; P = 0.001], atypical cytology (OR, 4.11; 95% CI, 1.30-12.98; P = 0.016), and benign breast disease requiring biopsy (OR, 6.12; 95% CI, 1.41-26.51; P = 0.016). RASSF1A methylation increased linearly between ages 32 and 55. Increasing parity was associated with decreased APC methylation. CONCLUSIONS: TSG methylation increases in benign breast epithelium with increasing age. Because it is independently related to a personal history of benign or malignant breast disease and to predicted breast cancer risk, it may have value for breast cancer risk stratification and as a surrogate endpoint marker in prevention trials.. BACKGROUND: Many established breast cancer risk factors are related to the timing and duration of exposure to reproductive hormones, which are known to drive breast epithelial cell proliferation. The epigenetic molecular clock hypothesis suggests that CpG island methylation records the cell division history of benign epithelium. In proliferative epithelium, such as breast, this may provide an individualized cell-based measure of cancer risk. METHODS: Methylation of cyclin D2, APC, HIN1, RASSF1A, and RAR-beta2 was measured by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR in 290 benign and malignant breast epithelial cell samples obtained by palpation-directed fine-needle aspiration biopsy from 164 women. Univariate, multivariate, and unsupervised cluster analysis was used to establish the relationship between TSG methylation and a personal history of breast cancer, predicted breast cancer risk, and specific breast cancer risk factors. RESULTS: RASSF1A methylation was highly correlated with breast cancer risk [odds ratio (OR), 5.28; 95% confidence interval (95% CI), 1.95-14.32; P = 0.001], atypical cytology (OR, 4.11; 95% CI, 1.30-12.98; P = 0.016), and benign breast disease requiring biopsy (OR, 6.12; 95% CI, 1.41-26.51; P = 0.016). RASSF1A methylation increased linearly between ages 32 and 55. Increasing parity was associated with decreased APC methylation. CONCLUSIONS: TSG methylation increases in benign breast epithelium with increasing age. Because it is independently related to a personal history of benign or malignant breast disease and to predicted breast cancer risk, it may have value for breast cancer risk stratification and as a surrogate endpoint marker in prevention trials.

Pathogenic variants in BRCA1 or BRCA2 are identified in approximately 20% of families with multiple individuals affected by early-onset breast and/or ovarian cancer. Extensive searches for additional highly penetrant genes or alternative mutational mechanisms altering BRCA1 or BRCA2 have not explained the missing heritability. Here, we report a dominantly inherited 5' UTR variant associated with epigenetic BRCA1 silencing due to promoter hypermethylation in two families affected by breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 promoter methylation of ten CpG dinucleotides in families who are affected by breast and/or ovarian cancer but do not have germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variants was assessed by pyrosequencing and clonal bisulfite sequencing. RNA and DNA sequencing of BRCA1 from lymphocytes was undertaken to establish allelic expression and the presence of germline variants. BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was identified in 2 of 49 families in which multiple women are affected by grade 3 breast cancer or high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Soma-wide BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was confirmed in blood, buccal mucosa, and hair follicles. Pyrosequencing showed that DNA was approximately 50% methylated, consistent with the silencing of one allele, which was confirmed by clonal bisulfite sequencing. RNA sequencing revealed the allelic loss of BRCA1 expression in both families and that this loss of expression segregated with the heterozygous variant c.-107A>T in the BRCA1 5' UTR. Our results establish a mechanism whereby familial breast and ovarian cancer is caused by an in cis 5' UTR variant associated with epigenetic silencing of the BRCA1 promoter in two independent families. We propose that methylation analyses be undertaken to establish the frequency of this mechanism in families affected by early-onset breast and/or ovarian cancer without a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant.. Pathogenic variants in BRCA1 or BRCA2 are identified in approximately 20% of families with multiple individuals affected by early-onset breast and/or ovarian cancer. Extensive searches for additional highly penetrant genes or alternative mutational mechanisms altering BRCA1 or BRCA2 have not explained the missing heritability. Here, we report a dominantly inherited 5' UTR variant associated with epigenetic BRCA1 silencing due to promoter hypermethylation in two families affected by breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 promoter methylation of ten CpG dinucleotides in families who are affected by breast and/or ovarian cancer but do not have germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variants was assessed by pyrosequencing and clonal bisulfite sequencing. RNA and DNA sequencing of BRCA1 from lymphocytes was undertaken to establish allelic expression and the presence of germline variants. BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was identified in 2 of 49 families in which multiple women are affected by grade 3 breast cancer or high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Soma-wide BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was confirmed in blood, buccal mucosa, and hair follicles. Pyrosequencing showed that DNA was approximately 50% methylated, consistent with the silencing of one allele, which was confirmed by clonal bisulfite sequencing. RNA sequencing revealed the allelic loss of BRCA1 expression in both families and that this loss of expression segregated with the heterozygous variant c.-107A>T in the BRCA1 5' UTR. Our results establish a mechanism whereby familial breast and ovarian cancer is caused by an in cis 5' UTR variant associated with epigenetic silencing of the BRCA1 promoter in two independent families. We propose that methylation analyses be undertaken to establish the frequency of this mechanism in families affected by early-onset breast and/or ovarian cancer without a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant.

If detected early, breast cancer is curable. We tested cells collected from the breast ducts by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Methylated alleles of Cyclin D2, RAR-beta, and Twist genes were frequently detected in fluid from mammary ducts containing endoscopically visualised carcinomas (17 cases of 20), and ductal carcinoma in situ (two of seven), but rarely in ductal lavage fluid from healthy ducts (five of 45). Two of the women with healthy mammograms whose ductal lavage fluid contained methylated markers and cytologically abnormal cells were subsequently diagnosed with breast cancer. Carrying out MSP in these fluid samples may provide a sensitive and powerful addition to mammographic screening for early detection of breast cancer.. If detected early, breast cancer is curable. We tested cells collected from the breast ducts by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Methylated alleles of Cyclin D2, RAR-beta, and Twist genes were frequently detected in fluid from mammary ducts containing endoscopically visualised carcinomas (17 cases of 20), and ductal carcinoma in situ (two of seven), but rarely in ductal lavage fluid from healthy ducts (five of 45). Two of the women with healthy mammograms whose ductal lavage fluid contained methylated markers and cytologically abnormal cells were subsequently diagnosed with breast cancer. Carrying out MSP in these fluid samples may provide a sensitive and powerful addition to mammographic screening for early detection of breast cancer.

In the tested samples of sporadic breast cancer (100 cases), hypermethylation of CpG sequences located in ERalpha promoter was observed in 62 cases. It correlated with: (i) deficiency of ERalpha protein in 45%, (ii) hypermethylation of BRCA1 promoter in 95%, and (iii) nonmethylated E-cadherin promoter in 90%. Fifty-eight percent of the patients with nonmethylated E-cadherin promoter (56 cases) did not show metastasis to lymphatic nodes. The analysis of the methylation level of the promoter of ERalpha, BRCA1, and E-cadherin, frequently connected with their activity, shows that it can be an important parameter in the diagnosis and therapeutic strategies in sporadic breast cancer.. In the tested samples of sporadic breast cancer (100 cases), hypermethylation of CpG sequences located in ERalpha promoter was observed in 62 cases. It correlated with: (i) deficiency of ERalpha protein in 45%, (ii) hypermethylation of BRCA1 promoter in 95%, and (iii) nonmethylated E-cadherin promoter in 90%. Fifty-eight percent of the patients with nonmethylated E-cadherin promoter (56 cases) did not show metastasis to lymphatic nodes. The analysis of the methylation level of the promoter of ERalpha, BRCA1, and E-cadherin, frequently connected with their activity, shows that it can be an important parameter in the diagnosis and therapeutic strategies in sporadic breast cancer.

PURPOSE: The challenges of cytology for accurate diagnosis of breast cancer are well recognized. We previously showed that normal and tumor tissue can be distinguished using a technique called quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR (QM-MSP). We hypothesized that quantitative analysis of methylated genes will provide enhanced detection of cancer cells present in cytologic specimens. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: QM-MSP was done on ductal lavage cells from a set of 37 ductal lavage samples from women undergoing mastectomy (27 with cancer and 3 without). Duct histology information was available for each lavaged duct. QM-MSP data was assessed by measuring cumulative methylation index and by receiver operating characteristic threshold analysis. To determine the baseline level of methylation for each gene in this population, cells from 60 ducts of women at high risk of developing breast cancer were analyzed. RESULTS: QM-MSP findings on a panel of nine genes were correlated to duct histology and ductal lavage cytology. Cytology detected cancer in 33% (7 of 21 ducts) with a specificity of 99% (92 of 93). QM-MSP detected cancer as calculated by cumulative methylation index with a sensitivity of 62% (13 of 21) and specificity of 82% (62 of 76) and by receiver operating characteristic threshold analysis with a sensitivity of 71% (15 of 21) and specificity of 83% (63 of 76). CONCLUSIONS: Compared with cytology, QM-MSP doubled the sensitivity of detection of cancer. This study provides proof of principle by showing the advantages of using methylation analyses to query cytologic specimens and indicates its potential use in diagnosis and in stratifying risk.. PURPOSE: The challenges of cytology for accurate diagnosis of breast cancer are well recognized. We previously showed that normal and tumor tissue can be distinguished using a technique called quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR (QM-MSP). We hypothesized that quantitative analysis of methylated genes will provide enhanced detection of cancer cells present in cytologic specimens. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: QM-MSP was done on ductal lavage cells from a set of 37 ductal lavage samples from women undergoing mastectomy (27 with cancer and 3 without). Duct histology information was available for each lavaged duct. QM-MSP data was assessed by measuring cumulative methylation index and by receiver operating characteristic threshold analysis. To determine the baseline level of methylation for each gene in this population, cells from 60 ducts of women at high risk of developing breast cancer were analyzed. RESULTS: QM-MSP findings on a panel of nine genes were correlated to duct histology and ductal lavage cytology. Cytology detected cancer in 33% (7 of 21 ducts) with a specificity of 99% (92 of 93). QM-MSP detected cancer as calculated by cumulative methylation index with a sensitivity of 62% (13 of 21) and specificity of 82% (62 of 76) and by receiver operating characteristic threshold analysis with a sensitivity of 71% (15 of 21) and specificity of 83% (63 of 76). CONCLUSIONS: Compared with cytology, QM-MSP doubled the sensitivity of detection of cancer. This study provides proof of principle by showing the advantages of using methylation analyses to query cytologic specimens and indicates its potential use in diagnosis and in stratifying risk.

Little is known about epigenetic silencing of genes by promoter hypermethylation in lobular breast cancers. The promoter methylation status of 5 cancer-related genes (RASSF1A, HIN-1, RAR-beta, Cyclin D2 and Twist) was evaluated in 2 types of lobular cancers, in situ (LCIS) and invasive lobular carcinomas (ILC) (n = 32), and compared to ductal in situ (DCIS) and invasive (IDC) breast cancers (n = 71). By using methylation-specific PCR (MSP), 100% of ILC and 69% of LCIS cases were found to have 1 or more hypermethylated genes among the panel of 5 genes (compared to 100% IDC and 95% of DCIS). Two or more hypermethylated genes were detected per tumor in 79% of invasive and 61% of in situ lobular carcinomas compared to 81% of IDC and 77% of DCIS. By contrast, DNA from nearly all normal reduction mammoplasty tissues (n = 8) was unmethylated for the 5 genes. The methylation profiles of lobular vs. ductal carcinomas with respect to RASSF1A, Cyclin D2, RARbeta, and Hin-1 genes were similar, suggesting that gene silencing by promoter hypermethylation is likely to be important in both groups of diseases. Distinctly different, Twist was hyper- methylated less often in ILC (16%, 3/19 cases) than in IDC (56%, 15/27 cases) (p = 0.01). These results suggest that these 2 types of tumors share many common methylation patterns and some molecular differences. Additional studies might lend further understanding into the etiology and clinical behavior of this tumor type.. Little is known about epigenetic silencing of genes by promoter hypermethylation in lobular breast cancers. The promoter methylation status of 5 cancer-related genes (RASSF1A, HIN-1, RAR-beta, Cyclin D2 and Twist) was evaluated in 2 types of lobular cancers, in situ (LCIS) and invasive lobular carcinomas (ILC) (n = 32), and compared to ductal in situ (DCIS) and invasive (IDC) breast cancers (n = 71). By using methylation-specific PCR (MSP), 100% of ILC and 69% of LCIS cases were found to have 1 or more hypermethylated genes among the panel of 5 genes (compared to 100% IDC and 95% of DCIS). Two or more hypermethylated genes were detected per tumor in 79% of invasive and 61% of in situ lobular carcinomas compared to 81% of IDC and 77% of DCIS. By contrast, DNA from nearly all normal reduction mammoplasty tissues (n = 8) was unmethylated for the 5 genes. The methylation profiles of lobular vs. ductal carcinomas with respect to RASSF1A, Cyclin D2, RARbeta, and Hin-1 genes were similar, suggesting that gene silencing by promoter hypermethylation is likely to be important in both groups of diseases. Distinctly different, Twist was hyper- methylated less often in ILC (16%, 3/19 cases) than in IDC (56%, 15/27 cases) (p = 0.01). These results suggest that these 2 types of tumors share many common methylation patterns and some molecular differences. Additional studies might lend further understanding into the etiology and clinical behavior of this tumor type.

If detected early, breast cancer is eminently curable. To detect breast cancer in samples with little cellularity, a high level of sensitivity is needed. Tumor-specific promoter hypermethylation has provided such a valuable tool for detection of cancer cells in biological samples. To accurately assess promoter hypermethylation for many genes simultaneously in small samples, we developed a novel method, quantitative multiplex-methylation-specific PCR (QM-MSP). QM-MSP is highly sensitive (1 in 10(4)-10(5) copies of DNA) and linear over 5 orders of magnitude. For RASSF1A, TWIST, Cyclin D2, and HIN1, we observed significant differences in both the degree (P < 0.003) and incidence (P < 0.02) of hypermethylation between normal and malignant breast tissues. Evaluation of the cumulative hypermethylation of the four genes within each sample revealed a high level of sensitivity (84%) and specificity (89%) of detection of methylation. We demonstrate the application of this technique for detecting hypermethylated RASSF1A, TWIST, Cyclin D2, HIN1, and RARB in 50-1000 epithelial cells collected from breast ducts during endoscopy or by lavage. Such an approach could be used in a variety of small samples derived from different tissues, with these or different biomarkers to enhance detection of malignancy.. If detected early, breast cancer is eminently curable. To detect breast cancer in samples with little cellularity, a high level of sensitivity is needed. Tumor-specific promoter hypermethylation has provided such a valuable tool for detection of cancer cells in biological samples. To accurately assess promoter hypermethylation for many genes simultaneously in small samples, we developed a novel method, quantitative multiplex-methylation-specific PCR (QM-MSP). QM-MSP is highly sensitive (1 in 10(4)-10(5) copies of DNA) and linear over 5 orders of magnitude. For RASSF1A, TWIST, Cyclin D2, and HIN1, we observed significant differences in both the degree (P < 0.003) and incidence (P < 0.02) of hypermethylation between normal and malignant breast tissues. Evaluation of the cumulative hypermethylation of the four genes within each sample revealed a high level of sensitivity (84%) and specificity (89%) of detection of methylation. We demonstrate the application of this technique for detecting hypermethylated RASSF1A, TWIST, Cyclin D2, HIN1, and RARB in 50-1000 epithelial cells collected from breast ducts during endoscopy or by lavage. Such an approach could be used in a variety of small samples derived from different tissues, with these or different biomarkers to enhance detection of malignancy.

To better understand the biology of hormone receptor-positive and-negative breast cancer and to identify methylated gene markers of disease progression, we carried out a genome-wide methylation array analysis on 103 primary invasive breast cancers and 21 normal breast samples, using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation27 array that queried 27,578 CpG loci. Estrogen and/or progesterone receptor-positive tumors displayed more hypermethylated loci than estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors. However, the hypermethylated loci in ER-negative tumors were clustered closer to the transcriptional start site compared with ER-positive tumors. An ER-classifier set of CpG loci was identified, which independently partitioned primary tumors into ER subtypes. A total of 40 (32 novel and 8 previously known) CpG loci showed differential methylation specific to either ER-positive or ER-negative tumors. Each of the 40 ER subtype-specific loci was validated in silico, using an independent, publicly available methylome dataset from the Cancer Genome Atlas. In addition, we identified 100 methylated CpG loci that were significantly associated with disease progression; the majority of these loci were informative particularly in ER-negative breast cancer. Overall, the set was highly enriched in homeobox containing genes. This pilot study shows the robustness of the breast cancer methylome and illustrates its potential to stratify and reveal biological differences between ER subtypes of breast cancer. Furthermore, it defines candidate ER-specific markers and identifies potential markers predictive of outcome within ER subgroups.. To better understand the biology of hormone receptor-positive and-negative breast cancer and to identify methylated gene markers of disease progression, we carried out a genome-wide methylation array analysis on 103 primary invasive breast cancers and 21 normal breast samples, using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation27 array that queried 27,578 CpG loci. Estrogen and/or progesterone receptor-positive tumors displayed more hypermethylated loci than estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors. However, the hypermethylated loci in ER-negative tumors were clustered closer to the transcriptional start site compared with ER-positive tumors. An ER-classifier set of CpG loci was identified, which independently partitioned primary tumors into ER subtypes. A total of 40 (32 novel and 8 previously known) CpG loci showed differential methylation specific to either ER-positive or ER-negative tumors. Each of the 40 ER subtype-specific loci was validated in silico, using an independent, publicly available methylome dataset from the Cancer Genome Atlas. In addition, we identified 100 methylated CpG loci that were significantly associated with disease progression; the majority of these loci were informative particularly in ER-negative breast cancer. Overall, the set was highly enriched in homeobox containing genes. This pilot study shows the robustness of the breast cancer methylome and illustrates its potential to stratify and reveal biological differences between ER subtypes of breast cancer. Furthermore, it defines candidate ER-specific markers and identifies potential markers predictive of outcome within ER subgroups.

DNA methylation is known to be involved in eukaryotic gene control; it may thus exert effects during development and tumorigenesis. We have examined the methylation status of the estrogen receptor (ER) gene in different human tissues. The ER gene was found to be methylated in placental tissues, but normal breast tissues exhibited a different methylation pattern. In addition, specific sites in the hormone-binding domain of the ER gene were observed to be differently methylated in different human breast tumor specimens. We did not detect, however, any association between the ER status of a tumor and ER gene methylation at these sites. Interestingly, a difference in the methylation status between normal and adjacent breast tumor tissues was observed. Thus, DNA methylation may be considered an additional molecular measure of the genetic heterogeneity in breast cancer.. DNA methylation is known to be involved in eukaryotic gene control; it may thus exert effects during development and tumorigenesis. We have examined the methylation status of the estrogen receptor (ER) gene in different human tissues. The ER gene was found to be methylated in placental tissues, but normal breast tissues exhibited a different methylation pattern. In addition, specific sites in the hormone-binding domain of the ER gene were observed to be differently methylated in different human breast tumor specimens. We did not detect, however, any association between the ER status of a tumor and ER gene methylation at these sites. Interestingly, a difference in the methylation status between normal and adjacent breast tumor tissues was observed. Thus, DNA methylation may be considered an additional molecular measure of the genetic heterogeneity in breast cancer.

The development of targeted therapies for antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer requires a detailed understanding of its molecular characteristics. To further elucidate the molecular events underlying acquired resistance to the antiestrogens tamoxifen and fulvestrant, we established drug-resistant sublines from a single colony of hormone-dependent breast cancer MCF7 cells. These model systems allowed us to examine the cellular and molecular changes induced by antiestrogens in the context of a uniform clonal background. Global changes in both basal and estrogen-induced gene expression profiles were determined in hormone-sensitive and hormonal-resistant sublines using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays. Changes in DNA methylation were assessed by differential methylation hybridization, a high-throughput promoter CpG island microarray analysis. By comparative studies, we found distinct gene expression and promoter DNA methylation profiles associated with acquired resistance to fulvestrant versus tamoxifen. Fulvestrant resistance was characterized by pronounced up-regulation of multiple growth-stimulatory pathways, resulting in estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-independent, autocrine-regulated proliferation. Conversely, acquired resistance to tamoxifen correlated with maintenance of the ERalpha-positive phenotype, although receptor-mediated gene regulation was altered. Activation of growth-promoting genes, due to promoter hypomethylation, was more frequently observed in antiestrogen-resistant cells compared with gene inactivation by promoter hypermethylation, revealing an unexpected insight into the molecular changes associated with endocrine resistance. In summary, this study provides an in-depth understanding of the molecular changes specific to acquired resistance to clinically important antiestrogens. Such knowledge of resistance-associated mechanisms could allow for identification of therapy targets and strategies for resensitization to these well-established antihormonal agents.. The development of targeted therapies for antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer requires a detailed understanding of its molecular characteristics. To further elucidate the molecular events underlying acquired resistance to the antiestrogens tamoxifen and fulvestrant, we established drug-resistant sublines from a single colony of hormone-dependent breast cancer MCF7 cells. These model systems allowed us to examine the cellular and molecular changes induced by antiestrogens in the context of a uniform clonal background. Global changes in both basal and estrogen-induced gene expression profiles were determined in hormone-sensitive and hormonal-resistant sublines using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Arrays. Changes in DNA methylation were assessed by differential methylation hybridization, a high-throughput promoter CpG island microarray analysis. By comparative studies, we found distinct gene expression and promoter DNA methylation profiles associated with acquired resistance to fulvestrant versus tamoxifen. Fulvestrant resistance was characterized by pronounced up-regulation of multiple growth-stimulatory pathways, resulting in estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-independent, autocrine-regulated proliferation. Conversely, acquired resistance to tamoxifen correlated with maintenance of the ERalpha-positive phenotype, although receptor-mediated gene regulation was altered. Activation of growth-promoting genes, due to promoter hypomethylation, was more frequently observed in antiestrogen-resistant cells compared with gene inactivation by promoter hypermethylation, revealing an unexpected insight into the molecular changes associated with endocrine resistance. In summary, this study provides an in-depth understanding of the molecular changes specific to acquired resistance to clinically important antiestrogens. Such knowledge of resistance-associated mechanisms could allow for identification of therapy targets and strategies for resensitization to these well-established antihormonal agents.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic studies demonstrate that an association may exist between methylation of the retinoic acid receptor beta2 (RARbeta2) gene promoter and breast cancer onset risk, tumor stage, and histological grade, however the results of these studies are not consistent. Hence, we performed this meta-analysis to ascertain a more comprehensive and accurate association. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Relevant studies were retrieved from the PubMed, Embase and Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure databases up to February 28, 2015. After two independent reviewers screened the studies and extracted the necessary data, meta-analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.2 software. RESULTS: Nineteen eligible articles, including 20 studies, were included in our analysis. Compared to non-cancerous controls, the frequency of RARbeta2 methylation was 7.27 times higher in patients with breast cancer (odds ratio (OR) = 7.27, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 3.01-17.52). Compared to late-stage RARbeta2 methylated patients, the pooled OR of early-stage ones was 0.81 (OR = 0.81, 95% CI = 0.55-1.17). The OR of low-grade RARbeta2 methylated patients was 0.96 (OR = 0.96, 95% CI = 0.74-1.25) compared to high-grade RARbeta2 methylated patients. CONCLUSION: RARbeta2 methylation is significantly increased in breast cancer samples when compared to non-cancerous controls. RARbeta2 could serve as a potential epigenetic marker for breast cancer detection and management.. BACKGROUND: Epigenetic studies demonstrate that an association may exist between methylation of the retinoic acid receptor beta2 (RARbeta2) gene promoter and breast cancer onset risk, tumor stage, and histological grade, however the results of these studies are not consistent. Hence, we performed this meta-analysis to ascertain a more comprehensive and accurate association. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Relevant studies were retrieved from the PubMed, Embase and Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure databases up to February 28, 2015. After two independent reviewers screened the studies and extracted the necessary data, meta-analysis was performed using Review Manager 5.2 software. RESULTS: Nineteen eligible articles, including 20 studies, were included in our analysis. Compared to non-cancerous controls, the frequency of RARbeta2 methylation was 7.27 times higher in patients with breast cancer (odds ratio (OR) = 7.27, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 3.01-17.52). Compared to late-stage RARbeta2 methylated patients, the pooled OR of early-stage ones was 0.81 (OR = 0.81, 95% CI = 0.55-1.17). The OR of low-grade RARbeta2 methylated patients was 0.96 (OR = 0.96, 95% CI = 0.74-1.25) compared to high-grade RARbeta2 methylated patients. CONCLUSION: RARbeta2 methylation is significantly increased in breast cancer samples when compared to non-cancerous controls. RARbeta2 could serve as a potential epigenetic marker for breast cancer detection and management.

BACKGROUND: Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) has been reported to function as a tumor suppressor gene in various types of human cancers. Aberrant methylation of tumor-related genes at the promoter regions can inactivate genes, which is important in the carcinogenesis of breast cancer. However, the role of GSTP1 promoter methylation in the occurrence of breast cancer and its relationship with tumor stage and histological grade has not been fully elucidated. Thus, we carried out a meta-analysis to yield a more accurate association. METHODS: A systematically literature search was made on PubMed, EMBASE and Web of Science databases for eligible studies. The odds ratio (OR) and 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) were calculated by RevMan 5.2 software. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses were conducted to explore the source of heterogeneity. RESULTS: Eventually, 17 articles involving 19 case-control studies were included in the present meta-analysis. Overall, the pooled results indicated that aberrant GSTP1 promoter methylation was significantly associated with the risk of breast cancer (OR = 7.85, 95 % CI = 5.12-12.01; Caucasians OR = 7.23, 95 % CI = 3.76-13.90 and Asians OR = 11.71, 95 % CI = 5.69-24.07). Furthermore, our results revealed that GSTP1 promoter methylation was more often observed in late-stage breast cancer patients compared with early-stage ones (OR = 1.84, 95 % CI = 1.32-2.58). However, no significant association was identified between GSTP1 promoter methylation and histological grade (OR = 0.74, 95 % CI = 0.43-1.26). CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that GSTP1 promoter methylation probably plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis, which could serve as an effective biomarker for the diagnosis and monitor of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) has been reported to function as a tumor suppressor gene in various types of human cancers. Aberrant methylation of tumor-related genes at the promoter regions can inactivate genes, which is important in the carcinogenesis of breast cancer. However, the role of GSTP1 promoter methylation in the occurrence of breast cancer and its relationship with tumor stage and histological grade has not been fully elucidated. Thus, we carried out a meta-analysis to yield a more accurate association. METHODS: A systematically literature search was made on PubMed, EMBASE and Web of Science databases for eligible studies. The odds ratio (OR) and 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) were calculated by RevMan 5.2 software. Subgroup and sensitivity analyses were conducted to explore the source of heterogeneity. RESULTS: Eventually, 17 articles involving 19 case-control studies were included in the present meta-analysis. Overall, the pooled results indicated that aberrant GSTP1 promoter methylation was significantly associated with the risk of breast cancer (OR = 7.85, 95 % CI = 5.12-12.01; Caucasians OR = 7.23, 95 % CI = 3.76-13.90 and Asians OR = 11.71, 95 % CI = 5.69-24.07). Furthermore, our results revealed that GSTP1 promoter methylation was more often observed in late-stage breast cancer patients compared with early-stage ones (OR = 1.84, 95 % CI = 1.32-2.58). However, no significant association was identified between GSTP1 promoter methylation and histological grade (OR = 0.74, 95 % CI = 0.43-1.26). CONCLUSIONS: The results indicated that GSTP1 promoter methylation probably plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis, which could serve as an effective biomarker for the diagnosis and monitor of breast cancer.

Expression level of integrin alpha5 in tumor cells has been indicated to be involved in cell proliferation and organ-specific metastasis. We previously demonstrated that ITGA5 expression was downregulated in the high invasive MDA-MB-468 cells compared with other breast cancer cell lines. In this study, we found that the methylation status in the region around transcriptional start site of ITGA5 gene was increased in MDA-MB-468 cells. Overexpression of integrin alpha5 on MDA-MB-468 cells resulted in cell growth inhibition, which could be reversed by adhesion to fibronectin. Cell adhesion and spreading to fibronectin was enhanced after ITGA5 was overexpressed in MDA-MB-468 cells, while cell migration was attenuated. Knockdown of ITGA5 in MCF-7 cells led to cell growth inhibition but had little influence on cell migration. These findings indicated the diverse roles of ITGA5 expression in breast cancer cells.. Expression level of integrin alpha5 in tumor cells has been indicated to be involved in cell proliferation and organ-specific metastasis. We previously demonstrated that ITGA5 expression was downregulated in the high invasive MDA-MB-468 cells compared with other breast cancer cell lines. In this study, we found that the methylation status in the region around transcriptional start site of ITGA5 gene was increased in MDA-MB-468 cells. Overexpression of integrin alpha5 on MDA-MB-468 cells resulted in cell growth inhibition, which could be reversed by adhesion to fibronectin. Cell adhesion and spreading to fibronectin was enhanced after ITGA5 was overexpressed in MDA-MB-468 cells, while cell migration was attenuated. Knockdown of ITGA5 in MCF-7 cells led to cell growth inhibition but had little influence on cell migration. These findings indicated the diverse roles of ITGA5 expression in breast cancer cells.

E2F4 is an important basal transcription factor with the potential to promote tumor growth. Its upregulation in various types of cancer has been linked to numerous genetic factors; however, the nature of the involvement of epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation, remains elusive. In the present study, E2F4 expression profiles were determined in 100 paired breast tumor and control samples, through RT-qPCR using the SYBR((R)) green method. Furthermore, the E2F4 promoter methylation status in each of these samples was assessed using methylation specific PCR, in order to evaluate its impact on gene expression. A two-fold increase in E2F4 gene expression was observed in the breast tumors compared with in their respective controls (P=0.022); of these tumors, ~72% were under-methylated. The change in methylation status was also significantly higher (P<0.001) in the tumor samples. Methylation status was negatively correlated (r=-30) with E2F4 expression profiles, indicating that a decrease in methylation may promote higher expression of E2F4. The two study cohorts (>45 and </=45 years) had comparable methylation profiles, though they had significantly decreased methylation status compared with controls. Various histo-pathological types also have different methylation profiles, indicating the presence of a tissue specific methylation signature. The results of the present study demonstrated that E2F4 methylation status can have a notable influence on its expression, and that it may have prognostic value in breast carcinogenesis.. E2F4 is an important basal transcription factor with the potential to promote tumor growth. Its upregulation in various types of cancer has been linked to numerous genetic factors; however, the nature of the involvement of epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation, remains elusive. In the present study, E2F4 expression profiles were determined in 100 paired breast tumor and control samples, through RT-qPCR using the SYBR((R)) green method. Furthermore, the E2F4 promoter methylation status in each of these samples was assessed using methylation specific PCR, in order to evaluate its impact on gene expression. A two-fold increase in E2F4 gene expression was observed in the breast tumors compared with in their respective controls (P=0.022); of these tumors, ~72% were under-methylated. The change in methylation status was also significantly higher (P<0.001) in the tumor samples. Methylation status was negatively correlated (r=-30) with E2F4 expression profiles, indicating that a decrease in methylation may promote higher expression of E2F4. The two study cohorts (>45 and </=45 years) had comparable methylation profiles, though they had significantly decreased methylation status compared with controls. Various histo-pathological types also have different methylation profiles, indicating the presence of a tissue specific methylation signature. The results of the present study demonstrated that E2F4 methylation status can have a notable influence on its expression, and that it may have prognostic value in breast carcinogenesis.

Aberrant DNA methylation constitutes a well-established epigenetic marker for breast cancer. Changes in methylation early in cancer development may be clinically relevant for cancer detection and prognosis-based therapeutic decisions. In the present study, a combination of methyl-CpG immunoprecipitation (MCIp) and human CpG island (CGI) arrays was applied to compare genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in 10 low-grade in situ and invasive breast cancers against 10 normal breast samples. In total, 214 CGIs were found to be hypermethylated in >/=6 of 10 tumors. Functional term enrichment analyses revealed an overrepresentation of homeobox genes and genes involved in transcription and regulation of transcription. Significant hypermethylation of 11 selected genes in tumor vs. normal tissue was validated in two independent sample sets (45 tumors and 11 controls, 43 tumors and 8 controls) using quantitative EpiTyper technology. In tumors, median methylation levels of BCAN, HOXD1, KCTD8, KLF11, NXPH1, POU4F1, SIM1, and TCF7L1 were >/=30% higher than in normal samples, representing potential biomarkers for tumor diagnosis. Using the 90th percentile of methylation levels in normal tissue as cutoff value, 62-92% of in situ samples (n=13), 72-97% of invasive samples from the first validation set (n=32), and 86-100% of invasive samples from the second validation set (n=43) were classified as hypermethylated. Hypermethylation of KLF11 and SIM1 might also be associated with increased risk of developing metastases. In summary, early methylation changes are frequent in the low-grade pathway of breast cancer and may be useful in the development of differential diagnostic and possibly also prognostic markers.. Aberrant DNA methylation constitutes a well-established epigenetic marker for breast cancer. Changes in methylation early in cancer development may be clinically relevant for cancer detection and prognosis-based therapeutic decisions. In the present study, a combination of methyl-CpG immunoprecipitation (MCIp) and human CpG island (CGI) arrays was applied to compare genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in 10 low-grade in situ and invasive breast cancers against 10 normal breast samples. In total, 214 CGIs were found to be hypermethylated in >/=6 of 10 tumors. Functional term enrichment analyses revealed an overrepresentation of homeobox genes and genes involved in transcription and regulation of transcription. Significant hypermethylation of 11 selected genes in tumor vs. normal tissue was validated in two independent sample sets (45 tumors and 11 controls, 43 tumors and 8 controls) using quantitative EpiTyper technology. In tumors, median methylation levels of BCAN, HOXD1, KCTD8, KLF11, NXPH1, POU4F1, SIM1, and TCF7L1 were >/=30% higher than in normal samples, representing potential biomarkers for tumor diagnosis. Using the 90th percentile of methylation levels in normal tissue as cutoff value, 62-92% of in situ samples (n=13), 72-97% of invasive samples from the first validation set (n=32), and 86-100% of invasive samples from the second validation set (n=43) were classified as hypermethylated. Hypermethylation of KLF11 and SIM1 might also be associated with increased risk of developing metastases. In summary, early methylation changes are frequent in the low-grade pathway of breast cancer and may be useful in the development of differential diagnostic and possibly also prognostic markers.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation has the potential of being a tumor marker. This study was to evaluate the methylation statuses of BRCA1 and p16 gene promoter in tumor tissue and serum of breast cancer patients, and explore their diagnostic value. METHODS: The methylation statuses of BRCA1 and p16 genes in 63 specimens of sporadic breast cancer and corresponding serum samples were detected by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). The serum level of CA15-3 was detected by immunofluorescent method. RESULTS: The methylation rates of BRCA1 and p16 were 34.9% and 28.6% in tumor tissues, and were 31.7% and 25.4% in corresponding serum samples; the methylation rate of BRCA1 and/or p16 was 60.3% in tumor tissues, and was 54.0% in serum samples. The methylation rate of BRCA1 and/or p16 was related with tumor histological type, lymph node metastases and living area of patients (P<0.05). The sensitivity and specificity of CA15-3 as a diagnostic index for breast cancer were 47.6% and 93.1%; while the sensitivity and specificity of gene methylation and CA15-3 detection in combination were 84.1% and 93.1%. Univariate analysis showed that the methylation of BRCA1 and/or p16, tumor type and living area of patients were related to tumor recurrence with relative risk of 14.0, 6.7 and 5.14 (P<0.05). Multivariate analysis showed that only the methylation of BRCA1 and/or p16 and tumor type were related to tumor recurrence with relative risk of 6.7 and 5.1 (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: Detecting the methylation of BRCA1 and p16 gene together with CA15-3 is helpful for specific diagnosis of breast cancer, and has a predictive value for tumor recurrence.. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation has the potential of being a tumor marker. This study was to evaluate the methylation statuses of BRCA1 and p16 gene promoter in tumor tissue and serum of breast cancer patients, and explore their diagnostic value. METHODS: The methylation statuses of BRCA1 and p16 genes in 63 specimens of sporadic breast cancer and corresponding serum samples were detected by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). The serum level of CA15-3 was detected by immunofluorescent method. RESULTS: The methylation rates of BRCA1 and p16 were 34.9% and 28.6% in tumor tissues, and were 31.7% and 25.4% in corresponding serum samples; the methylation rate of BRCA1 and/or p16 was 60.3% in tumor tissues, and was 54.0% in serum samples. The methylation rate of BRCA1 and/or p16 was related with tumor histological type, lymph node metastases and living area of patients (P<0.05). The sensitivity and specificity of CA15-3 as a diagnostic index for breast cancer were 47.6% and 93.1%; while the sensitivity and specificity of gene methylation and CA15-3 detection in combination were 84.1% and 93.1%. Univariate analysis showed that the methylation of BRCA1 and/or p16, tumor type and living area of patients were related to tumor recurrence with relative risk of 14.0, 6.7 and 5.14 (P<0.05). Multivariate analysis showed that only the methylation of BRCA1 and/or p16 and tumor type were related to tumor recurrence with relative risk of 6.7 and 5.1 (P<0.05). CONCLUSION: Detecting the methylation of BRCA1 and p16 gene together with CA15-3 is helpful for specific diagnosis of breast cancer, and has a predictive value for tumor recurrence.

INTRODUCTION: Aberrant DNA methylation has been found frequently in human breast cancers, associated with the loss of expression of a number of regulatory genes for growth and correlated to clinical outcomes. The present study was undertaken to determine whether methylation of a set of growth-suppressor genes would correlate to the expression of estrogen receptors (ERs) and progesterone receptors (PRs). METHODS: We used a pyrosequencing methylation analysis to study the methylation of 12 known growth-suppressor genes in 90 pairs of malignant/normal breast tissues. We also examined the expression of ERs and PRs in those specimens by immunohistochemistry. Mutations of p53 in tumor cells were detected by direct sequencing. RESULTS: Twelve tumor-suppressor genes: ARHI, RASSF1A, HIN-1, RARbeta2, hMLH1, 14-3-3 sigma, RIZ1, p16, E-cadherin, RIL, CDH13, and NKD2 were selected for this methylation study. Five of them (RIL, HIN-1, RASSF1A, CDH13, and RARbeta2) were frequently methylated in breast cancers (57%, 49%, 58%, 44%, and 17%, respectively) but not the normal breast (0-4%). Two panels of methylation profiles were defined. The methylation of the HIN-1/RASSFIA panel strongly correlated to the expression of ERs, PRs, and hormone receptors (HRs; which were defined as 'positive' if ERs and/or PRs were positive; p < 0.001). Conversely, the methylation of the RIL/CDH13 panel strongly correlated to negative ER, PR, and HR expression (p = 0.001, 0.025, and 0.001, respectively). The subset of triple-negative breast cancers (in other words, those with negative ER, PR, and HER-2/neu status) was positively associated with the methylation of the RIL/CDH13 panel and negatively associated with the HIN-1/RASSF1A panel. Mutations of p53 were found in nine breast tumors (11%), seven of which lacked methylation in both panels. CONCLUSION: We have defined two panels (HIN-1/RASSFIA, and RIL/CDH13) of methylation profiles, which correlated, either positively or negatively, to HR status.. INTRODUCTION: Aberrant DNA methylation has been found frequently in human breast cancers, associated with the loss of expression of a number of regulatory genes for growth and correlated to clinical outcomes. The present study was undertaken to determine whether methylation of a set of growth-suppressor genes would correlate to the expression of estrogen receptors (ERs) and progesterone receptors (PRs). METHODS: We used a pyrosequencing methylation analysis to study the methylation of 12 known growth-suppressor genes in 90 pairs of malignant/normal breast tissues. We also examined the expression of ERs and PRs in those specimens by immunohistochemistry. Mutations of p53 in tumor cells were detected by direct sequencing. RESULTS: Twelve tumor-suppressor genes: ARHI, RASSF1A, HIN-1, RARbeta2, hMLH1, 14-3-3 sigma, RIZ1, p16, E-cadherin, RIL, CDH13, and NKD2 were selected for this methylation study. Five of them (RIL, HIN-1, RASSF1A, CDH13, and RARbeta2) were frequently methylated in breast cancers (57%, 49%, 58%, 44%, and 17%, respectively) but not the normal breast (0-4%). Two panels of methylation profiles were defined. The methylation of the HIN-1/RASSFIA panel strongly correlated to the expression of ERs, PRs, and hormone receptors (HRs; which were defined as 'positive' if ERs and/or PRs were positive; p < 0.001). Conversely, the methylation of the RIL/CDH13 panel strongly correlated to negative ER, PR, and HR expression (p = 0.001, 0.025, and 0.001, respectively). The subset of triple-negative breast cancers (in other words, those with negative ER, PR, and HER-2/neu status) was positively associated with the methylation of the RIL/CDH13 panel and negatively associated with the HIN-1/RASSF1A panel. Mutations of p53 were found in nine breast tumors (11%), seven of which lacked methylation in both panels. CONCLUSION: We have defined two panels (HIN-1/RASSFIA, and RIL/CDH13) of methylation profiles, which correlated, either positively or negatively, to HR status.

It has been suggested that xenoestrogens, a group of agents termed endocrine disruptors, may contribute to the development of hormone-dependent cancers, such as breast and endometrial cancers. We previously demonstrated that the xenoestrogen, bisphenol A (BPA), was able to induce the transformation in vitro of human breast epithelial cells. The normal-like human breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10F, formed tubules in collagen (3-D cultures), although after treatment with BPA (10-5 M and 10-6 M BPA) the cells produced less tubules (73% and 80%, respectively) and some spherical masses (27% and 20%, respectively). In the present study, expression and DNA methylation analyses were performed in these cells after exposure to BPA. These cells showed an increased expression of BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1, CtIP, RAD51 and BRCC3, all of which are genes involved in DNA repair, as well as the downregulation of PDCD5 and BCL2L11 (BIM), both of which are involved in apoptosis. Furthermore, DNA methylation analysis showed that the BPA exposure induced the hypermethylation of BCL2L11, PARD6G, FOXP1 and SFRS11, as well as the hypomethylation of NUP98 and CtIP (RBBP8). Our results indicate that normal human breast epithelial cells exposed to BPA have increased expressions of genes involved in DNA repair in order to overcome the DNA damage induced by this chemical. These results suggest that the breast tissue of women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations could be more susceptible to the effects of BPA.. It has been suggested that xenoestrogens, a group of agents termed endocrine disruptors, may contribute to the development of hormone-dependent cancers, such as breast and endometrial cancers. We previously demonstrated that the xenoestrogen, bisphenol A (BPA), was able to induce the transformation in vitro of human breast epithelial cells. The normal-like human breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10F, formed tubules in collagen (3-D cultures), although after treatment with BPA (10-5 M and 10-6 M BPA) the cells produced less tubules (73% and 80%, respectively) and some spherical masses (27% and 20%, respectively). In the present study, expression and DNA methylation analyses were performed in these cells after exposure to BPA. These cells showed an increased expression of BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1, CtIP, RAD51 and BRCC3, all of which are genes involved in DNA repair, as well as the downregulation of PDCD5 and BCL2L11 (BIM), both of which are involved in apoptosis. Furthermore, DNA methylation analysis showed that the BPA exposure induced the hypermethylation of BCL2L11, PARD6G, FOXP1 and SFRS11, as well as the hypomethylation of NUP98 and CtIP (RBBP8). Our results indicate that normal human breast epithelial cells exposed to BPA have increased expressions of genes involved in DNA repair in order to overcome the DNA damage induced by this chemical. These results suggest that the breast tissue of women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations could be more susceptible to the effects of BPA.

Epigenetic inactivation of genes by DNA hypermethylation plays an important role in carcinogenesis. An in vitro model of human breast epithelial cell transformation was used to study epigenetic changes induced by estradiol during the neoplastic process. Different stages of tumor initiation and progression are represented in this model being MCF-10F the normal stage; trMCF cells, the transformed stage; bsMCF cells, the invasive stage and, caMCF cells, the tumor stage. Global methylation studies by restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) showed an increased DNA methylation during the in the invasive and tumor stages. Expression studies showed that NRG1 (neuregulin 1), CSS3 (chondroitin sulfate synthase 3) and SNIP (SNAP-25-interacting protein) were downregulated in the invasive and tumor cells. The transformed cells showed low expression of STXBP6 (amysin) compared to the parental cells MCF-10F. The treatment of these cells with the demethylating agent 5-aza-dC alone or in combination with the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin increased the expression of NRG1, STXBP6, CSS3 and SNIP confirming that DNA methylation plays an important role in the regulation of the expression of these genes. The NRG1 exon 1 has a region located between -136 and +79 (considering +1, the translational initiation site) rich in CpG sites that was analyzed by methylation specific PCR (MSP). NRG1 exon 1 showed progressive changes in the methylation pattern associated with the progression of the neoplastic process in this model; NRG1 exon 1 was unmethylated in MCF-10F and trMCF cells, becoming hypermethylated in the invasive (bsMCF) and tumor (caMCF) stages. Studies of human breast tissue samples showed that NRG1 exon 1 was partially methylated in 14 out of 17 (82.4%) invasive carcinomas although it was unmethylated in normal tissues (8 out of 10 normal breast tissue samples). Furthermore, NRG1 exon 1 was partially methylated in 9 out of 14 (64.3%) morphologically normal tissue samples adjacent to invasive carcinomas.. Epigenetic inactivation of genes by DNA hypermethylation plays an important role in carcinogenesis. An in vitro model of human breast epithelial cell transformation was used to study epigenetic changes induced by estradiol during the neoplastic process. Different stages of tumor initiation and progression are represented in this model being MCF-10F the normal stage; trMCF cells, the transformed stage; bsMCF cells, the invasive stage and, caMCF cells, the tumor stage. Global methylation studies by restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) showed an increased DNA methylation during the in the invasive and tumor stages. Expression studies showed that NRG1 (neuregulin 1), CSS3 (chondroitin sulfate synthase 3) and SNIP (SNAP-25-interacting protein) were downregulated in the invasive and tumor cells. The transformed cells showed low expression of STXBP6 (amysin) compared to the parental cells MCF-10F. The treatment of these cells with the demethylating agent 5-aza-dC alone or in combination with the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin increased the expression of NRG1, STXBP6, CSS3 and SNIP confirming that DNA methylation plays an important role in the regulation of the expression of these genes. The NRG1 exon 1 has a region located between -136 and +79 (considering +1, the translational initiation site) rich in CpG sites that was analyzed by methylation specific PCR (MSP). NRG1 exon 1 showed progressive changes in the methylation pattern associated with the progression of the neoplastic process in this model; NRG1 exon 1 was unmethylated in MCF-10F and trMCF cells, becoming hypermethylated in the invasive (bsMCF) and tumor (caMCF) stages. Studies of human breast tissue samples showed that NRG1 exon 1 was partially methylated in 14 out of 17 (82.4%) invasive carcinomas although it was unmethylated in normal tissues (8 out of 10 normal breast tissue samples). Furthermore, NRG1 exon 1 was partially methylated in 9 out of 14 (64.3%) morphologically normal tissue samples adjacent to invasive carcinomas.

The HER-2/neu gene is amplified and overexpressed in 20% to 30% of invasive breast carcinomas and is associated with increased metastatic potential and less tamoxifen sensitivity. We generated the DNA methylation profiles of 143 human breast tumors and found significant differences in HER-2/neu expression and DNA methylation of five genes. For three of these five genes [PGR (coding for the progesterone receptor), HSD17B4 (coding for type 4 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, an enzyme that mainly degrades active 17-beta-estradiol into inactive metabolites), and CDH13 (coding for H-cadherin)] a higher prevalence of DNA methylation in HER-2/neu-positive cancers was confirmed in an independent set of microdissected primary breast cancers. DNA methylation was not only present in cancer cells but also in the tumor stroma fraction. Of the isolated fractions in HER-2/neu-positive versus -negative cancers, 27.1% versus 10.5%, respectively, showed DNA methylation of the five genes (P = 0.011, Fisher's exact test). In Her-2++/+++ breast cancers, HSD17B4 mRNA expression was inversely associated with HSD17B4 methylation (P = 0.04). These data support the view that in addition to HER-2/neu-associated signaling, epigenetic changes in cancer as well as in tumor stroma cells might attribute to the specific biological features of HER-2/neu-positive cancers.. The HER-2/neu gene is amplified and overexpressed in 20% to 30% of invasive breast carcinomas and is associated with increased metastatic potential and less tamoxifen sensitivity. We generated the DNA methylation profiles of 143 human breast tumors and found significant differences in HER-2/neu expression and DNA methylation of five genes. For three of these five genes [PGR (coding for the progesterone receptor), HSD17B4 (coding for type 4 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, an enzyme that mainly degrades active 17-beta-estradiol into inactive metabolites), and CDH13 (coding for H-cadherin)] a higher prevalence of DNA methylation in HER-2/neu-positive cancers was confirmed in an independent set of microdissected primary breast cancers. DNA methylation was not only present in cancer cells but also in the tumor stroma fraction. Of the isolated fractions in HER-2/neu-positive versus -negative cancers, 27.1% versus 10.5%, respectively, showed DNA methylation of the five genes (P = 0.011, Fisher's exact test). In Her-2++/+++ breast cancers, HSD17B4 mRNA expression was inversely associated with HSD17B4 methylation (P = 0.04). These data support the view that in addition to HER-2/neu-associated signaling, epigenetic changes in cancer as well as in tumor stroma cells might attribute to the specific biological features of HER-2/neu-positive cancers.

Identification of prognostic gene expression signatures may enable improved decisions about management of breast cancer. To identify a prognostic signature for breast cancer, we performed DNA methylation profiling and identified methylation markers that were associated with expression of ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6, and EGFR proteins. Methylation markers that were correlated with corresponding mRNA expression levels were identified using 208 invasive tumors from a population-based case-control study conducted in Poland. Using this approach, we defined the methylation expression index (MEI) signature that was based on a weighted sum of mRNA levels of 57 genes. Classification of cases as low or high MEI scores was related to survival using Cox regression models. In the Polish study, women with ER-positive low MEI cancers had reduced survival at a median of 5.20 years of follow-up, HR = 2.85 95 % CI = 1.25-6.47. Low MEI was also related to decreased survival in four independent datasets totaling over 2500 ER-positive breast cancers. These results suggest that integrated analysis of tumor expression markers, DNA methylation, and mRNA data may be an important approach for identifying breast cancer prognostic signatures. Prospective assessment of MEI along with other prognostic signatures should be evaluated in future studies.. Identification of prognostic gene expression signatures may enable improved decisions about management of breast cancer. To identify a prognostic signature for breast cancer, we performed DNA methylation profiling and identified methylation markers that were associated with expression of ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6, and EGFR proteins. Methylation markers that were correlated with corresponding mRNA expression levels were identified using 208 invasive tumors from a population-based case-control study conducted in Poland. Using this approach, we defined the methylation expression index (MEI) signature that was based on a weighted sum of mRNA levels of 57 genes. Classification of cases as low or high MEI scores was related to survival using Cox regression models. In the Polish study, women with ER-positive low MEI cancers had reduced survival at a median of 5.20 years of follow-up, HR = 2.85 95 % CI = 1.25-6.47. Low MEI was also related to decreased survival in four independent datasets totaling over 2500 ER-positive breast cancers. These results suggest that integrated analysis of tumor expression markers, DNA methylation, and mRNA data may be an important approach for identifying breast cancer prognostic signatures. Prospective assessment of MEI along with other prognostic signatures should be evaluated in future studies.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease for which alterations in DNA methylation patterns have been shown to be of biological and clinical importance. Here we report on the integrated analysis of molecular alterations including the methylation status of 27 gene promoters analyzed by highly quantitative pyrosequencing, and the association to gene expression, germline genotype and clinical parameters including survival. Breast cancer specific deregulation of DNA methylation (both hyper- and hypomethylation) was found in twenty genes including ACVR1, OGG1, IL8 and TFF1. The methylation level in the promoter regions was significantly negatively correlated to gene expression for twelve genes (such as MST1R, ST6GAL1 and TFF1) indicating that a gain of aberrant methylation (hypermethylation) inhibits gene expression. Multiple associations between molecular and clinical parameters were identified, and multivariate statistical analysis demonstrated that methylation was more strongly associated to clinical parameters than gene expression for the investigated genes. The methylation level of BCAP31 and OGG1 showed significant association to survival, and these associations were validated in a larger patient cohort (The Cancer Genome Atlas). Our study provides evidence for the promise of DNA methylation alterations for clinical applications.. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease for which alterations in DNA methylation patterns have been shown to be of biological and clinical importance. Here we report on the integrated analysis of molecular alterations including the methylation status of 27 gene promoters analyzed by highly quantitative pyrosequencing, and the association to gene expression, germline genotype and clinical parameters including survival. Breast cancer specific deregulation of DNA methylation (both hyper- and hypomethylation) was found in twenty genes including ACVR1, OGG1, IL8 and TFF1. The methylation level in the promoter regions was significantly negatively correlated to gene expression for twelve genes (such as MST1R, ST6GAL1 and TFF1) indicating that a gain of aberrant methylation (hypermethylation) inhibits gene expression. Multiple associations between molecular and clinical parameters were identified, and multivariate statistical analysis demonstrated that methylation was more strongly associated to clinical parameters than gene expression for the investigated genes. The methylation level of BCAP31 and OGG1 showed significant association to survival, and these associations were validated in a larger patient cohort (The Cancer Genome Atlas). Our study provides evidence for the promise of DNA methylation alterations for clinical applications.

BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast is a precursor of invasive breast carcinoma. DNA methylation alterations are thought to be an early event in progression of cancer, and may prove valuable as a tool in clinical decision making and for understanding neoplastic development. RESULTS: We generate genome-wide DNA methylation profiles of 285 breast tissue samples representing progression of cancer, and validate methylation changes between normal and DCIS in an independent dataset of 15 normal and 40 DCIS samples. We also validate a prognostic signature on 583 breast cancer samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Our analysis reveals that DNA methylation profiles of DCIS are radically altered compared to normal breast tissue, involving more than 5,000 genes. Changes between DCIS and invasive breast carcinoma involve around 1,000 genes. In tumors, DNA methylation is associated with gene expression of almost 3,000 genes, including both negative and positive correlations. A prognostic signature based on methylation level of 18 CpGs is associated with survival of breast cancer patients with invasive tumors, as well as with survival of patients with DCIS and mixed lesions of DCIS and invasive breast carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates that changes in the epigenome occur early in the neoplastic progression, provides evidence for the possible utilization of DNA methylation-based markers of progression in the clinic, and highlights the importance of epigenetic changes in carcinogenesis.. BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast is a precursor of invasive breast carcinoma. DNA methylation alterations are thought to be an early event in progression of cancer, and may prove valuable as a tool in clinical decision making and for understanding neoplastic development. RESULTS: We generate genome-wide DNA methylation profiles of 285 breast tissue samples representing progression of cancer, and validate methylation changes between normal and DCIS in an independent dataset of 15 normal and 40 DCIS samples. We also validate a prognostic signature on 583 breast cancer samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Our analysis reveals that DNA methylation profiles of DCIS are radically altered compared to normal breast tissue, involving more than 5,000 genes. Changes between DCIS and invasive breast carcinoma involve around 1,000 genes. In tumors, DNA methylation is associated with gene expression of almost 3,000 genes, including both negative and positive correlations. A prognostic signature based on methylation level of 18 CpGs is associated with survival of breast cancer patients with invasive tumors, as well as with survival of patients with DCIS and mixed lesions of DCIS and invasive breast carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates that changes in the epigenome occur early in the neoplastic progression, provides evidence for the possible utilization of DNA methylation-based markers of progression in the clinic, and highlights the importance of epigenetic changes in carcinogenesis.

Breast cancer patients with Luminal A disease generally have a good prognosis, but among this patient group are patients with good prognosis that are currently overtreated with adjuvant chemotherapy, and also patients that have a bad prognosis and should be given more aggressive treatment. There is no available method for subclassification of this patient group. Here we present a DNA methylation signature (SAM40) that segregates Luminal A patients based on prognosis, and identify one good prognosis group and one bad prognosis group. The prognostic impact of SAM40 was validated in four independent patient cohorts. Being able to subdivide the Luminal A patients may give the two-sided benefit of identifying one subgroup that may benefit from a more aggressive treatment than what is given today, and importantly, identifying a subgroup that may benefit from less treatment.. Breast cancer patients with Luminal A disease generally have a good prognosis, but among this patient group are patients with good prognosis that are currently overtreated with adjuvant chemotherapy, and also patients that have a bad prognosis and should be given more aggressive treatment. There is no available method for subclassification of this patient group. Here we present a DNA methylation signature (SAM40) that segregates Luminal A patients based on prognosis, and identify one good prognosis group and one bad prognosis group. The prognostic impact of SAM40 was validated in four independent patient cohorts. Being able to subdivide the Luminal A patients may give the two-sided benefit of identifying one subgroup that may benefit from a more aggressive treatment than what is given today, and importantly, identifying a subgroup that may benefit from less treatment.

Breast cancers exhibit genome-wide aberrant DNA methylation patterns. To investigate how these affect the transcriptome and which changes are linked to transformation or progression, we apply genome-wide expression-methylation quantitative trait loci (emQTL) analysis between DNA methylation and gene expression. On a whole genome scale, in cis and in trans, DNA methylation and gene expression have remarkably and reproducibly conserved patterns of association in three breast cancer cohorts (n = 104, n = 253 and n = 277). The expression-methylation quantitative trait loci associations form two main clusters; one relates to tumor infiltrating immune cell signatures and the other to estrogen receptor signaling. In the estrogen related cluster, using ChromHMM segmentation and transcription factor chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data, we identify transcriptional networks regulated in a cell lineage-specific manner by DNA methylation at enhancers. These networks are strongly dominated by ERalpha, FOXA1 or GATA3 and their targets were functionally validated using knockdown by small interfering RNA or GRO-seq analysis after transcriptional stimulation with estrogen.. Breast cancers exhibit genome-wide aberrant DNA methylation patterns. To investigate how these affect the transcriptome and which changes are linked to transformation or progression, we apply genome-wide expression-methylation quantitative trait loci (emQTL) analysis between DNA methylation and gene expression. On a whole genome scale, in cis and in trans, DNA methylation and gene expression have remarkably and reproducibly conserved patterns of association in three breast cancer cohorts (n = 104, n = 253 and n = 277). The expression-methylation quantitative trait loci associations form two main clusters; one relates to tumor infiltrating immune cell signatures and the other to estrogen receptor signaling. In the estrogen related cluster, using ChromHMM segmentation and transcription factor chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data, we identify transcriptional networks regulated in a cell lineage-specific manner by DNA methylation at enhancers. These networks are strongly dominated by ERalpha, FOXA1 or GATA3 and their targets were functionally validated using knockdown by small interfering RNA or GRO-seq analysis after transcriptional stimulation with estrogen.

Germline pathogenic mutations in BRCA1 increase risk of developing breast cancer. Screening for mutations in BRCA1 frequently identifies sequence variants of unknown pathogenicity and recent work has aimed to develop methods for determining pathogenicity. We previously observed that tumor DNA methylation can differentiate BRCA1-mutated from BRCA1-wild type tumors. We hypothesized that we could predict pathogenicity of variants based on DNA methylation profiles of tumors that had arisen in carriers of unclassified variants. We selected 150 FFPE breast tumor DNA samples [47 BRCA1 pathogenic mutation carriers, 65 BRCAx (BRCA1-wild type), 38 BRCA1 test variants] and analyzed a subset (n=54) using the Illumina 450K methylation platform, using the remaining samples for bisulphite pyrosequencing validation. Three validated markers (BACH2, C8orf31, and LOC654342) were combined with sequence bioinformatics in a model to predict pathogenicity of 27 variants (independent test set). Predictions were compared with standard multifactorial likelihood analysis. Prediction was consistent for c.5194-12G>A (IVS 19-12 G>A) (P>0.99); 13 variants were considered not pathogenic or likely not pathogenic using both approaches. We conclude that tumor DNA methylation data alone has potential to be used in prediction of BRCA1 variant pathogenicity but is not independent of estrogen receptor status and grade, which are used in current multifactorial models to predict pathogenicity.. Germline pathogenic mutations in BRCA1 increase risk of developing breast cancer. Screening for mutations in BRCA1 frequently identifies sequence variants of unknown pathogenicity and recent work has aimed to develop methods for determining pathogenicity. We previously observed that tumor DNA methylation can differentiate BRCA1-mutated from BRCA1-wild type tumors. We hypothesized that we could predict pathogenicity of variants based on DNA methylation profiles of tumors that had arisen in carriers of unclassified variants. We selected 150 FFPE breast tumor DNA samples [47 BRCA1 pathogenic mutation carriers, 65 BRCAx (BRCA1-wild type), 38 BRCA1 test variants] and analyzed a subset (n=54) using the Illumina 450K methylation platform, using the remaining samples for bisulphite pyrosequencing validation. Three validated markers (BACH2, C8orf31, and LOC654342) were combined with sequence bioinformatics in a model to predict pathogenicity of 27 variants (independent test set). Predictions were compared with standard multifactorial likelihood analysis. Prediction was consistent for c.5194-12G>A (IVS 19-12 G>A) (P>0.99); 13 variants were considered not pathogenic or likely not pathogenic using both approaches. We conclude that tumor DNA methylation data alone has potential to be used in prediction of BRCA1 variant pathogenicity but is not independent of estrogen receptor status and grade, which are used in current multifactorial models to predict pathogenicity.

CONTEXT: Fatigue is the most common symptom associated with cancer and its treatment. Investigation of molecular mechanisms associated with fatigue may identify new therapeutic targets. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this pilot study was to evaluate the relationships between gene expression and methylation status and evening fatigue severity in women with breast cancer who received chemotherapy. METHODS: Latent class analysis (LCA) was used to identify evening fatigue phenotypes. In this analysis, the lowest (i.e., moderate, n = 7) and highest (i.e., very high, n = 29) fatigue-severity classes identified using LCA were analyzed via two stages. First, a total of 32,609 transcripts from whole blood were evaluated for differences in expression levels between the classes. Next, 637 methylation sites located within the putative transcription factor binding sites for those genes demonstrating differential expression were evaluated for differential methylation state between the classes. RESULTS: A total of 89 transcripts in 75 unique genes were differentially expressed between the moderate (the lowest fatigue-severity class identified) and very high evening fatigue classes. In addition, 23 differentially methylated probes and three differentially methylated regions were found between the moderate and very high evening fatigue classes. CONCLUSIONS: Using a multistaged integrated analysis of gene expression and methylation, differential methylation was identified in the regulatory regions of genes associated with previously hypothesized mechanisms for fatigue, including inflammation, immune function, neurotransmission, circadian rhythm, skeletal muscle energy, carbohydrate metabolism, and renal function as well as core biological processes including gene transcription and the cell-cycle regulation.. CONTEXT: Fatigue is the most common symptom associated with cancer and its treatment. Investigation of molecular mechanisms associated with fatigue may identify new therapeutic targets. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this pilot study was to evaluate the relationships between gene expression and methylation status and evening fatigue severity in women with breast cancer who received chemotherapy. METHODS: Latent class analysis (LCA) was used to identify evening fatigue phenotypes. In this analysis, the lowest (i.e., moderate, n = 7) and highest (i.e., very high, n = 29) fatigue-severity classes identified using LCA were analyzed via two stages. First, a total of 32,609 transcripts from whole blood were evaluated for differences in expression levels between the classes. Next, 637 methylation sites located within the putative transcription factor binding sites for those genes demonstrating differential expression were evaluated for differential methylation state between the classes. RESULTS: A total of 89 transcripts in 75 unique genes were differentially expressed between the moderate (the lowest fatigue-severity class identified) and very high evening fatigue classes. In addition, 23 differentially methylated probes and three differentially methylated regions were found between the moderate and very high evening fatigue classes. CONCLUSIONS: Using a multistaged integrated analysis of gene expression and methylation, differential methylation was identified in the regulatory regions of genes associated with previously hypothesized mechanisms for fatigue, including inflammation, immune function, neurotransmission, circadian rhythm, skeletal muscle energy, carbohydrate metabolism, and renal function as well as core biological processes including gene transcription and the cell-cycle regulation.

INTRODUCTION: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients without pathological complete response (pCR) to neoadjuvant chemotherapy have an unfavourable prognosis. TNBC harbouring BRCA-1 germline mutations may be less responsive to taxanes, while sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents is retained. A similar effect was seen in tumours with epigenetic BRCA-1 silencing. Patients without pCR to neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of epirubicin plus docetaxel routinely received post-operative CMF at our centre. Here, we investigated the effect of adjuvant CMF in patients with or without BRCA-1 methylation or TP53 mutation. METHODS: DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. For determining BRCA-1 methylation status, quantitative methylation-specific PCR was performed. For the investigation of TP53 mutation status, DNA was PCR amplified and sequenced by Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were included; BRCA-1 methylation was present in 41.7 %, while TP53 mutations were observed in 66.7 %. At a median follow-up of 27.5 months, 20 % of patients with BRCA-1 methylation had a disease-free survival (DFS) event, as compared to 64.3 % in the non-methylated group (p = 0.0472). Median DFS in the non-methylated group was 16 months and was not reached in the methylated group (n.s.). No association TP53 mutation status with clinical outcome was observed. CONCLUSIONS: Adjuvant CMF is of limited activity in TNBC refractory to taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In this population, BRCA-1 methylation was associated with a significant decrease in DFS events suggesting a better prognosis and potentially retained activity of DNA-damaging agents.. INTRODUCTION: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients without pathological complete response (pCR) to neoadjuvant chemotherapy have an unfavourable prognosis. TNBC harbouring BRCA-1 germline mutations may be less responsive to taxanes, while sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents is retained. A similar effect was seen in tumours with epigenetic BRCA-1 silencing. Patients without pCR to neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of epirubicin plus docetaxel routinely received post-operative CMF at our centre. Here, we investigated the effect of adjuvant CMF in patients with or without BRCA-1 methylation or TP53 mutation. METHODS: DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. For determining BRCA-1 methylation status, quantitative methylation-specific PCR was performed. For the investigation of TP53 mutation status, DNA was PCR amplified and sequenced by Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: Twenty-four patients were included; BRCA-1 methylation was present in 41.7 %, while TP53 mutations were observed in 66.7 %. At a median follow-up of 27.5 months, 20 % of patients with BRCA-1 methylation had a disease-free survival (DFS) event, as compared to 64.3 % in the non-methylated group (p = 0.0472). Median DFS in the non-methylated group was 16 months and was not reached in the methylated group (n.s.). No association TP53 mutation status with clinical outcome was observed. CONCLUSIONS: Adjuvant CMF is of limited activity in TNBC refractory to taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In this population, BRCA-1 methylation was associated with a significant decrease in DFS events suggesting a better prognosis and potentially retained activity of DNA-damaging agents.

We previously demonstrated that methylation of neugogenic differentiation 1 (NEUROD1) gene, a polycomb group target (PCGT) gene is a predictor of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Here, we address the question whether NEUROD1 methylation provides clinical information independent from its expression level, and whether PCGT methylation is homogeneous in breast cancer. We examined: (1) NEUROD1 methylation and mRNA expression in 9 breast cancer cell lines and 63 tumour specimens, (2) DNA methylation in a training set of 55 PCGT genes taken from the centre (TUC) and periphery (TUP) of 15 breast cancer specimens, and compared this with 22 non neoplastic controls, and finally, (3) validated statistically significant genes in an independent set of 20 cases versus 18 controls. 8/9 cell lines demonstrated NEUROD1 methylation, whereas, there was only one cell-line that showed NEUROD1 expression. There was no association between methylation and expression in breast tumour specimens, with only 14% exhibiting NEUROD1 expression. Of the 55 PCGT genes analysed, 24% (13/55) were shown to be cancer specific (p < 0.05) with a receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) area-under-the-curve (AUC) of >0.7 (range 0.71-0.95). DNA methylation accurately predicted the presence of cancer in both TUC and TUP. DNA methylation of PCGT genes predicts the presence of breast cancer and is not subject to tumour heterogeneity. Further work will reveal if methylation of PCGT genes will serve as a robust means for the clinical detection and assessment of breast cancer.. We previously demonstrated that methylation of neugogenic differentiation 1 (NEUROD1) gene, a polycomb group target (PCGT) gene is a predictor of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer. Here, we address the question whether NEUROD1 methylation provides clinical information independent from its expression level, and whether PCGT methylation is homogeneous in breast cancer. We examined: (1) NEUROD1 methylation and mRNA expression in 9 breast cancer cell lines and 63 tumour specimens, (2) DNA methylation in a training set of 55 PCGT genes taken from the centre (TUC) and periphery (TUP) of 15 breast cancer specimens, and compared this with 22 non neoplastic controls, and finally, (3) validated statistically significant genes in an independent set of 20 cases versus 18 controls. 8/9 cell lines demonstrated NEUROD1 methylation, whereas, there was only one cell-line that showed NEUROD1 expression. There was no association between methylation and expression in breast tumour specimens, with only 14% exhibiting NEUROD1 expression. Of the 55 PCGT genes analysed, 24% (13/55) were shown to be cancer specific (p < 0.05) with a receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) area-under-the-curve (AUC) of >0.7 (range 0.71-0.95). DNA methylation accurately predicted the presence of cancer in both TUC and TUP. DNA methylation of PCGT genes predicts the presence of breast cancer and is not subject to tumour heterogeneity. Further work will reveal if methylation of PCGT genes will serve as a robust means for the clinical detection and assessment of breast cancer.

The receptor tyrosine kinase EphB6 is expressed at reasonable levels in normal breast cells. It shows decreased abundance in non-invasive breast carcinoma cells and is transcriptionally silenced in invasive breast carcinoma cells. We have characterized EphB6 promoter and correlated the expression of EphB6 transcript to differential methylation of the promoter region. The demethylation of promoter sequence in vivo by growth in media containing 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restores the expression of EphB6 to normal levels in breast carcinoma cells, and the ability of the promoter to initiate transcription of a reporter gene is lost after methylation of the promoter sequence. The promoter region has binding sites for various factors such as SP1 and p300. The specific methylation of CpG dinucleotides has allowed us to design primers that can selectively amplify the methylated promoter and thus facilitate identification of normal, non-invasive, and invasive breast cells. The potential significance of EphB6 to serve as a diagnostic and prognostic indicator is discussed.. The receptor tyrosine kinase EphB6 is expressed at reasonable levels in normal breast cells. It shows decreased abundance in non-invasive breast carcinoma cells and is transcriptionally silenced in invasive breast carcinoma cells. We have characterized EphB6 promoter and correlated the expression of EphB6 transcript to differential methylation of the promoter region. The demethylation of promoter sequence in vivo by growth in media containing 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restores the expression of EphB6 to normal levels in breast carcinoma cells, and the ability of the promoter to initiate transcription of a reporter gene is lost after methylation of the promoter sequence. The promoter region has binding sites for various factors such as SP1 and p300. The specific methylation of CpG dinucleotides has allowed us to design primers that can selectively amplify the methylated promoter and thus facilitate identification of normal, non-invasive, and invasive breast cells. The potential significance of EphB6 to serve as a diagnostic and prognostic indicator is discussed.

Aberrant DNA methylation that leads to the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes is known to play an important role in the development and progression of breast cancer. Methylation status of cancer-related genes is considered to be a promising biomarker for the early diagnosis and prognosis of tumors. This study investigated the methylation status of the Sox17 gene in breast cancer tissue and its corresponding plasma DNA to evaluate the association of methylation levels with clinicopathological parameters and prognosis.The methylation status of the Sox17 gene promoter was evaluated with methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in 155 paired breast cancer tissue and plasma samples and in 60 paired normal breast tissue and plasma samples. Association of Sox17 methylation status with clinicopathological parameters was analyzed by chi tests. Overall and disease-free survival (DFS) curves were calculated using Kaplan-Meier analysis, and the differences between curves were analyzed by log-rank tests.The frequency of Sox17 gene methylation was 72.9% (113/155) in breast cancer tissues and 58.1% (90/155) in plasma DNA. Sox17 gene methylation was not found in normal breast tissues or in their paired plasma DNA. There was a significant correlation of Sox17 methylation between corresponding tumor tissues and paired plasma DNA (r = 0.688, P < 0.001). Aberrant Sox17 methylation in cancer tissues and in plasma DNA was significantly associated with the tumor node metastasis stage (P = 0.035 and P = 0.001, respectively) and with lymph node metastasis (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that aberrant Sox17 promoter methylation in cancer tissues and plasma DNA was associated with poor DFS (P < 0.005) and overall survival (OS) (P < 0.005). Multivariate analysis showed that Sox17 methylation in plasma DNA was an independent prognostic factor in breast cancer for both DFS (P = 0.020; hazard ratio [HR] = 2.142; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.128-4.067) and for OS (P = 0.001; HR = 4.737; 95% CI: 2.088-10.747).Sox17 gene promoter methylation may play an important role in breast cancer progression and could be used as a prognostic biomarker to identify patients at risk of developing metastasis or recurrence after mastectomy.. Aberrant DNA methylation that leads to the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes is known to play an important role in the development and progression of breast cancer. Methylation status of cancer-related genes is considered to be a promising biomarker for the early diagnosis and prognosis of tumors. This study investigated the methylation status of the Sox17 gene in breast cancer tissue and its corresponding plasma DNA to evaluate the association of methylation levels with clinicopathological parameters and prognosis.The methylation status of the Sox17 gene promoter was evaluated with methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in 155 paired breast cancer tissue and plasma samples and in 60 paired normal breast tissue and plasma samples. Association of Sox17 methylation status with clinicopathological parameters was analyzed by chi tests. Overall and disease-free survival (DFS) curves were calculated using Kaplan-Meier analysis, and the differences between curves were analyzed by log-rank tests.The frequency of Sox17 gene methylation was 72.9% (113/155) in breast cancer tissues and 58.1% (90/155) in plasma DNA. Sox17 gene methylation was not found in normal breast tissues or in their paired plasma DNA. There was a significant correlation of Sox17 methylation between corresponding tumor tissues and paired plasma DNA (r = 0.688, P < 0.001). Aberrant Sox17 methylation in cancer tissues and in plasma DNA was significantly associated with the tumor node metastasis stage (P = 0.035 and P = 0.001, respectively) and with lymph node metastasis (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that aberrant Sox17 promoter methylation in cancer tissues and plasma DNA was associated with poor DFS (P < 0.005) and overall survival (OS) (P < 0.005). Multivariate analysis showed that Sox17 methylation in plasma DNA was an independent prognostic factor in breast cancer for both DFS (P = 0.020; hazard ratio [HR] = 2.142; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.128-4.067) and for OS (P = 0.001; HR = 4.737; 95% CI: 2.088-10.747).Sox17 gene promoter methylation may play an important role in breast cancer progression and could be used as a prognostic biomarker to identify patients at risk of developing metastasis or recurrence after mastectomy.

SRY-box 17 (Sox17) is a transcription factor which involved in a variety of developmental processes and can act as an antagonist of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. However, the relationship between Sox17 gene expression, methylation status, and beta-catenin in breast cancer has not been established. Here we report that the expression level of Sox17 mRNA was dramatically decreased in five different breast cancer cell lines and 23 of 31 primary breast tumor samples, which significantly correlated with its methylation status. After treated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC, a demethylation agent), the expression levels of Sox17 mRNA and protein were obviously increased. Restored expression of Sox17 by 5-aza-dC treatment decreased the expression level of beta-catenin in breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of Sox17 in SKBR-3 and Bacp-37 cells enhanced beta-catenin expression. In 31 paired tissue samples, a significant difference between the expression level of Sox17 and beta-catenin was also observed (P < 0.001). Clinically, Sox17 methylation was detected in 74.3% breast tumors (84/113) and 31.9% (36/113) paired normal tissues, respectively (P < 0.0001). Sox17 methylation was also associated with tumor stage (P = 0.028) and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.013). These findings indicate that silencing of Sox17 due to promoter hypermethylation is a frequent event and may contribute to aberrant activation of Wnt signaling in breast cancer. Sox17 may be a valuable biomarker for the study of breast cancer carcinogenesis and progression.. SRY-box 17 (Sox17) is a transcription factor which involved in a variety of developmental processes and can act as an antagonist of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. However, the relationship between Sox17 gene expression, methylation status, and beta-catenin in breast cancer has not been established. Here we report that the expression level of Sox17 mRNA was dramatically decreased in five different breast cancer cell lines and 23 of 31 primary breast tumor samples, which significantly correlated with its methylation status. After treated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC, a demethylation agent), the expression levels of Sox17 mRNA and protein were obviously increased. Restored expression of Sox17 by 5-aza-dC treatment decreased the expression level of beta-catenin in breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of Sox17 in SKBR-3 and Bacp-37 cells enhanced beta-catenin expression. In 31 paired tissue samples, a significant difference between the expression level of Sox17 and beta-catenin was also observed (P < 0.001). Clinically, Sox17 methylation was detected in 74.3% breast tumors (84/113) and 31.9% (36/113) paired normal tissues, respectively (P < 0.0001). Sox17 methylation was also associated with tumor stage (P = 0.028) and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.013). These findings indicate that silencing of Sox17 due to promoter hypermethylation is a frequent event and may contribute to aberrant activation of Wnt signaling in breast cancer. Sox17 may be a valuable biomarker for the study of breast cancer carcinogenesis and progression.

EphA5 is a member of the Eph receptor tyrosine kinase family, which plays a critical role in the regulation of carcinogenesis. Our previous DNA methylation microarray results suggested that the CpG islands in the EphA5 promoter exhibited higher methylation levels in breast cancer tissues. In this study, we further analyzed EphA5 gene expression profiles, methylation status, and clinical implications in breast cancer. We found that the level of EphA5 mRNA was dramatically decreased in 5 different breast cancer cell lines. After treating the cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC, a demethylation agent), the levels of EphA5 mRNA and protein were significantly increased. Bisulfite sequencing and methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction detection showed that decreased expression of EphA5 was associated with its methylation status. We also found a significant correlation (P = .017) between the reduction of EphA5 mRNA levels and aberrant methylation of EphA5 in 31 paired tissue samples. In clinical samples, EphA5 methylation was detected in 64.1% (75/117) of breast tumors and 28.2% (33/117) of paired normal tissues (P < .001), which was associated with higher tumor grade (P = .024), lymph node metastasis (P = .004), and progesterone receptor-negative status (P = .008). Our data indicate that EphA5 might be a potential target for epigenetic silencing in primary breast cancer and a valuable molecular marker for breast cancer carcinogenesis and progression.. EphA5 is a member of the Eph receptor tyrosine kinase family, which plays a critical role in the regulation of carcinogenesis. Our previous DNA methylation microarray results suggested that the CpG islands in the EphA5 promoter exhibited higher methylation levels in breast cancer tissues. In this study, we further analyzed EphA5 gene expression profiles, methylation status, and clinical implications in breast cancer. We found that the level of EphA5 mRNA was dramatically decreased in 5 different breast cancer cell lines. After treating the cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC, a demethylation agent), the levels of EphA5 mRNA and protein were significantly increased. Bisulfite sequencing and methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction detection showed that decreased expression of EphA5 was associated with its methylation status. We also found a significant correlation (P = .017) between the reduction of EphA5 mRNA levels and aberrant methylation of EphA5 in 31 paired tissue samples. In clinical samples, EphA5 methylation was detected in 64.1% (75/117) of breast tumors and 28.2% (33/117) of paired normal tissues (P < .001), which was associated with higher tumor grade (P = .024), lymph node metastasis (P = .004), and progesterone receptor-negative status (P = .008). Our data indicate that EphA5 might be a potential target for epigenetic silencing in primary breast cancer and a valuable molecular marker for breast cancer carcinogenesis and progression.

HIC-1 (hypermethylated in cancer) is a candidate tumor suppressor gene which is located at 17p13.3, a region which frequently undergoes allelic loss in breast and other human cancers. HIC-1 is proposed to be commonly inactivated in human cancers by hypermethylation of a normally unmethylated dense CpG island which encompasses the entire gene. To study whether HIC-1 inactivation may be important to the development of breast cancer, we first measured methylation of the HIC-1 gene in normal breast ductal tissues from microdissected frozen breast tissues and from epithelial cells purified from mammoplasty specimens. Surprisingly, in all normal breast ductal tissues we found approximately equal amounts of densely methylated HIC-1 and completely unmethylated HIC-1. This is in contrast to most normal tissues, in which all copies of HIC-1 are completely unmethylated. We then evaluated 39 primary breast cancer tissues and found virtually complete methylation of the HIC-1 gene in 26 (67%) of the cases. We also found loss of heterozygosity at the telomeric portion of chromosomal arm 17p in 22 of the 26 cases with strongly methylated HIC-1, suggesting that loss of an unmethylated HIC-1 allele may contribute to the inactivation of HIC-1 in cells with a pre-existing methylated allele. Finally, by RNase protection analysis, HIC-1 was found to be expressed in microdissected normal breast ductal tissues and unmethylated tumors but not in tumors with hypermethylation of the HIC-1 gene. These results indicate that hypermethylation of HIC-1 and associated loss of HIC-1 expression is common in primary breast cancer. Furthermore, the HIC-1 gene is densely methylated in approximately one-half of the alleles in normal breast epithelium, which may predispose this tissue to inactivation of this gene by loss of heterozygosity.. HIC-1 (hypermethylated in cancer) is a candidate tumor suppressor gene which is located at 17p13.3, a region which frequently undergoes allelic loss in breast and other human cancers. HIC-1 is proposed to be commonly inactivated in human cancers by hypermethylation of a normally unmethylated dense CpG island which encompasses the entire gene. To study whether HIC-1 inactivation may be important to the development of breast cancer, we first measured methylation of the HIC-1 gene in normal breast ductal tissues from microdissected frozen breast tissues and from epithelial cells purified from mammoplasty specimens. Surprisingly, in all normal breast ductal tissues we found approximately equal amounts of densely methylated HIC-1 and completely unmethylated HIC-1. This is in contrast to most normal tissues, in which all copies of HIC-1 are completely unmethylated. We then evaluated 39 primary breast cancer tissues and found virtually complete methylation of the HIC-1 gene in 26 (67%) of the cases. We also found loss of heterozygosity at the telomeric portion of chromosomal arm 17p in 22 of the 26 cases with strongly methylated HIC-1, suggesting that loss of an unmethylated HIC-1 allele may contribute to the inactivation of HIC-1 in cells with a pre-existing methylated allele. Finally, by RNase protection analysis, HIC-1 was found to be expressed in microdissected normal breast ductal tissues and unmethylated tumors but not in tumors with hypermethylation of the HIC-1 gene. These results indicate that hypermethylation of HIC-1 and associated loss of HIC-1 expression is common in primary breast cancer. Furthermore, the HIC-1 gene is densely methylated in approximately one-half of the alleles in normal breast epithelium, which may predispose this tissue to inactivation of this gene by loss of heterozygosity.

Human epidermal growth factor (HER) 2-directed therapy is the standard treatment for HER2-positive breast cancer. Patients who achieved a pathological complete response (pCR) to the therapy are associated with excellent disease-free survival. However, few molecular markers are available to predict pCR. Here, we aimed to establish a DNA methylation marker to predict the response to trastuzumab and chemotherapy. A total of 67 patients were divided into screening (n = 21) and validation (n = 46) sets. Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of the screening set identified eight genomic regions specifically methylated in patients with pCR. Among these, HSD17B4 encoding type 4 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase was most significantly differentially methylated. The differential methylation was confirmed by pyrosequencing (P = 0.03), and a cutoff value was determined. This association was successfully validated in the validation set (P < 0.001), and patients with pCR were predicted with a high specificity (79%). Multivariate analysis, including tumor stage and hormone receptor status, showed that HSD17B4 methylation was an independent predictive factor (odds ratio: 10.0, 95% confidence interval 2.54-39.50, P = 0.001). Combination with ER status and HSD17B4 methylation improved the specificity up to 91%. Identification of HER2-positive breast cancer patients who would achieve pCR only by trastuzumab and chemotherapy may lead to surgery-free treatment for this group of breast cancer patients.. Human epidermal growth factor (HER) 2-directed therapy is the standard treatment for HER2-positive breast cancer. Patients who achieved a pathological complete response (pCR) to the therapy are associated with excellent disease-free survival. However, few molecular markers are available to predict pCR. Here, we aimed to establish a DNA methylation marker to predict the response to trastuzumab and chemotherapy. A total of 67 patients were divided into screening (n = 21) and validation (n = 46) sets. Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of the screening set identified eight genomic regions specifically methylated in patients with pCR. Among these, HSD17B4 encoding type 4 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase was most significantly differentially methylated. The differential methylation was confirmed by pyrosequencing (P = 0.03), and a cutoff value was determined. This association was successfully validated in the validation set (P < 0.001), and patients with pCR were predicted with a high specificity (79%). Multivariate analysis, including tumor stage and hormone receptor status, showed that HSD17B4 methylation was an independent predictive factor (odds ratio: 10.0, 95% confidence interval 2.54-39.50, P = 0.001). Combination with ER status and HSD17B4 methylation improved the specificity up to 91%. Identification of HER2-positive breast cancer patients who would achieve pCR only by trastuzumab and chemotherapy may lead to surgery-free treatment for this group of breast cancer patients.

PURPOSE: We recently developed the one-step methylation-specific PCR (OS-MSP) assay which can detect methylated DNA (met-DNA) in serum with high sensitivity. To examine its prognostic value, we applied this new assay to the detection of met-DNA in serum of breast cancer patients. METHODS: Serum samples taken before surgery from 336 primary invasive breast cancer patients were subjected to the OS-MSP assay for the promoter regions of GSTP1, RASSF1A, and RARbeta2. The assay outcome was considered positive when methylation was detected in at least one of these three genes. Total DNA content in serum was also determined. RESULTS: Of the 336 stage I/II patients, 33 (10%) were positive for met-DNA in serum and showed a significantly worse overall survival (OS) rate at 100 months (78 vs. 95%; p = 0.002) than those with negative findings (n = 303). Patients with high total DNA in serum (n = 112) also showed a significantly worse OS rate at 100 months (86 vs. 97%; p = 0.001) than those with low total DNA in serum (n = 224). Moreover, patients both positive for met-DNA and with high total DNA in serum (n = 18) showed a much worse OS rate at 100 months (65 vs. 94%; p < 0.001) than the others (n = 318). CONCLUSIONS: Met-DNA in serum detected with the OS-MSP assay constitutes a significant and independent prognostic factor, and its combination with total DNA in serum seems to be even more effective for prediction of prognosis for breast cancer patients.. PURPOSE: We recently developed the one-step methylation-specific PCR (OS-MSP) assay which can detect methylated DNA (met-DNA) in serum with high sensitivity. To examine its prognostic value, we applied this new assay to the detection of met-DNA in serum of breast cancer patients. METHODS: Serum samples taken before surgery from 336 primary invasive breast cancer patients were subjected to the OS-MSP assay for the promoter regions of GSTP1, RASSF1A, and RARbeta2. The assay outcome was considered positive when methylation was detected in at least one of these three genes. Total DNA content in serum was also determined. RESULTS: Of the 336 stage I/II patients, 33 (10%) were positive for met-DNA in serum and showed a significantly worse overall survival (OS) rate at 100 months (78 vs. 95%; p = 0.002) than those with negative findings (n = 303). Patients with high total DNA in serum (n = 112) also showed a significantly worse OS rate at 100 months (86 vs. 97%; p = 0.001) than those with low total DNA in serum (n = 224). Moreover, patients both positive for met-DNA and with high total DNA in serum (n = 18) showed a much worse OS rate at 100 months (65 vs. 94%; p < 0.001) than the others (n = 318). CONCLUSIONS: Met-DNA in serum detected with the OS-MSP assay constitutes a significant and independent prognostic factor, and its combination with total DNA in serum seems to be even more effective for prediction of prognosis for breast cancer patients.

Abnormal DNA methylation at the C-5 position of cytosine (5mC) of CpG dinucleotides is a well-known epigenetic feature of cancer. Levels of E-cadherin, which is regularly expressed in epithelial tissues, are frequently reduced in epithelial tumors due to transcriptional repression, sometimes accompanied by hypermethylation of the promoter region. deltaEF1 family proteins (deltaEF1/ZEB1 and SIP1/ZEB2), key regulators of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), suppress E-cadherin expression at the transcriptional level. We recently showed that levels of mRNAs encoding deltaEF1 proteins are regulated reciprocally with E-cadherin level in breast cancer cells. Here, we examined the mechanism underlying downregulation of E-cadherin expression in three basal-type breast cancer cells in which the E-cadherin promoter region is hypermethylated (Hs578T) or moderately methylated (BT549 and MDA-MB-231). Regardless of methylation status, treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza), which inhibits DNA methyltransferases, had no effect on E-cadherin expression. Knockdown of deltaEF1 and SIP1 resulted in recovery of E-cadherin expression in cells lacking hypermethylation, whereas combined treatment with 5-aza synergistically restored E-cadherin expression, especially when the E-cadherin promoter was hypermethylated. Moreover, deltaEF1 interacted with DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) through the Smad-binding domain. Sustained knockdown of deltaEF1 family proteins reduced the number of 5mC sites in the E-cadherin promoter region, suggesting that these proteins maintain 5mC through interaction with DNMT1 in breast cancer cells. Thus, deltaEF1 family proteins appear to repress expression of E-cadherin during cancer progression, both directly at the transcriptional level and indirectly at the epigenetic level.. Abnormal DNA methylation at the C-5 position of cytosine (5mC) of CpG dinucleotides is a well-known epigenetic feature of cancer. Levels of E-cadherin, which is regularly expressed in epithelial tissues, are frequently reduced in epithelial tumors due to transcriptional repression, sometimes accompanied by hypermethylation of the promoter region. deltaEF1 family proteins (deltaEF1/ZEB1 and SIP1/ZEB2), key regulators of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), suppress E-cadherin expression at the transcriptional level. We recently showed that levels of mRNAs encoding deltaEF1 proteins are regulated reciprocally with E-cadherin level in breast cancer cells. Here, we examined the mechanism underlying downregulation of E-cadherin expression in three basal-type breast cancer cells in which the E-cadherin promoter region is hypermethylated (Hs578T) or moderately methylated (BT549 and MDA-MB-231). Regardless of methylation status, treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza), which inhibits DNA methyltransferases, had no effect on E-cadherin expression. Knockdown of deltaEF1 and SIP1 resulted in recovery of E-cadherin expression in cells lacking hypermethylation, whereas combined treatment with 5-aza synergistically restored E-cadherin expression, especially when the E-cadherin promoter was hypermethylated. Moreover, deltaEF1 interacted with DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) through the Smad-binding domain. Sustained knockdown of deltaEF1 family proteins reduced the number of 5mC sites in the E-cadherin promoter region, suggesting that these proteins maintain 5mC through interaction with DNMT1 in breast cancer cells. Thus, deltaEF1 family proteins appear to repress expression of E-cadherin during cancer progression, both directly at the transcriptional level and indirectly at the epigenetic level.

BACKGROUND: Predictive factors of benefit from specific chemotherapy regimens are not currently available in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). MGMT (O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) controls DNA repair pathways, and its epigenetic silencing is used for predicting the response to the alkylating drug temozolomide in patients with glioma. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study population was composed of 84 patients with TNBC treated with alkylating agents and evaluated for clinicopathologic parameters (tumor shrinkage and pathologic complete response [pCR]). MGMT methylation status was assessed in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor specimens by pyrosequencing. The samples were categorized as methylated (mean methylation value > 5%), indeterminate (4%-5%), and unmethylated (</= 3%). RESULTS: MGMT methylation status was successfully evaluated in all the cases: 58.3% were methylated; 27.4%, unmethylated; and 14.3%, indeterminate. MGMT methylation was observed in 80%, 62%, and 29% of patients showing a 100%, 99% to 30%, and < 30% tumor reduction, respectively, a trend not achieving statistical significance (P = .23). There was no association between MGMT methylation status and pCR. CONCLUSION: The present study provided evidence that pyrosequencing performs well for the evaluation of MGMT methylation even in small bioptic samples, suggesting that it could be reliably used in translational studies of preoperative clinical trials. Although there was an association trend between high methylation levels and clinical response to therapy, no statistically significant association with the pCR was found. Further studies in larger series of patients are warranted for ascertaining the putative clinical role of MGMT in patients with TNBC.. BACKGROUND: Predictive factors of benefit from specific chemotherapy regimens are not currently available in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). MGMT (O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) controls DNA repair pathways, and its epigenetic silencing is used for predicting the response to the alkylating drug temozolomide in patients with glioma. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study population was composed of 84 patients with TNBC treated with alkylating agents and evaluated for clinicopathologic parameters (tumor shrinkage and pathologic complete response [pCR]). MGMT methylation status was assessed in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor specimens by pyrosequencing. The samples were categorized as methylated (mean methylation value > 5%), indeterminate (4%-5%), and unmethylated (</= 3%). RESULTS: MGMT methylation status was successfully evaluated in all the cases: 58.3% were methylated; 27.4%, unmethylated; and 14.3%, indeterminate. MGMT methylation was observed in 80%, 62%, and 29% of patients showing a 100%, 99% to 30%, and < 30% tumor reduction, respectively, a trend not achieving statistical significance (P = .23). There was no association between MGMT methylation status and pCR. CONCLUSION: The present study provided evidence that pyrosequencing performs well for the evaluation of MGMT methylation even in small bioptic samples, suggesting that it could be reliably used in translational studies of preoperative clinical trials. Although there was an association trend between high methylation levels and clinical response to therapy, no statistically significant association with the pCR was found. Further studies in larger series of patients are warranted for ascertaining the putative clinical role of MGMT in patients with TNBC.

Triple-negative breast cancers are characterized by the triple-negative (ER/PgR/Her2 negative) phenotype, are frequently associated with BRCA gene mutation, and are not candidate to currently available endocrine and HER2-targeted treatments. MGMT is involved in direct DNA repair exerted by cleavage of mutagenic alkyl adducts within DNA, and its epigenetic silencing confers susceptibility to DNA-damaging alkylating agents in glioblastomas and melanomas. MGMT methylation status has not been extensively investigated in breast cancer patients. The goal of our study was to evaluate the MGMT methylation status in TNBC patients, for most of which BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutational status was known. We evaluated MGMT methylation status by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 92 TNBC patients. By using the GelDoc system (Biorad) software, the cases were further classified as follows: 0 (absence of methylated signal), 1 (prevalence of unmethylated signal, U/M ratio>1), 2 (prevalence of methylated signal, U/M ratio<1), and 3 (absence of unmethylated signal). MSP products were obtained in 89 (96.7%) of the cases. Overall, 15 (16.9%) cases were classified as 0, 33 (37.1%) cases as 1, 39 (43.8%) cases as 2, and 2 (2.2%) cases as 3. The 48 cases classified as 0 and 1 were considered as MGMT unmethylated, and the 41 cases classified as 2 and 3 as MGMT methylated. The prevalence of MGMT methylation in patients with BRCA1 mutated, wild-type, and unknown was 30.2% (13/43), 63.6% (14/22), and 58.3% (14/24), respectively. MGMT methylation was unrelated to the main clinical pathological characteristics, with the exception of a weak association with advanced age. In conclusion, our data suggest that in TNBC with wild-type BRCA1, the direct DNA repair system may be frequently (63.6%) silenced by MGMT methylation. The evaluation of the MGMT status could offer a new adjunct in predicting tumor response to alkylating drugs in TNBC patients.. Triple-negative breast cancers are characterized by the triple-negative (ER/PgR/Her2 negative) phenotype, are frequently associated with BRCA gene mutation, and are not candidate to currently available endocrine and HER2-targeted treatments. MGMT is involved in direct DNA repair exerted by cleavage of mutagenic alkyl adducts within DNA, and its epigenetic silencing confers susceptibility to DNA-damaging alkylating agents in glioblastomas and melanomas. MGMT methylation status has not been extensively investigated in breast cancer patients. The goal of our study was to evaluate the MGMT methylation status in TNBC patients, for most of which BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutational status was known. We evaluated MGMT methylation status by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 92 TNBC patients. By using the GelDoc system (Biorad) software, the cases were further classified as follows: 0 (absence of methylated signal), 1 (prevalence of unmethylated signal, U/M ratio>1), 2 (prevalence of methylated signal, U/M ratio<1), and 3 (absence of unmethylated signal). MSP products were obtained in 89 (96.7%) of the cases. Overall, 15 (16.9%) cases were classified as 0, 33 (37.1%) cases as 1, 39 (43.8%) cases as 2, and 2 (2.2%) cases as 3. The 48 cases classified as 0 and 1 were considered as MGMT unmethylated, and the 41 cases classified as 2 and 3 as MGMT methylated. The prevalence of MGMT methylation in patients with BRCA1 mutated, wild-type, and unknown was 30.2% (13/43), 63.6% (14/22), and 58.3% (14/24), respectively. MGMT methylation was unrelated to the main clinical pathological characteristics, with the exception of a weak association with advanced age. In conclusion, our data suggest that in TNBC with wild-type BRCA1, the direct DNA repair system may be frequently (63.6%) silenced by MGMT methylation. The evaluation of the MGMT status could offer a new adjunct in predicting tumor response to alkylating drugs in TNBC patients.

The maspin gene functions as a tumor suppressor in human breasts, and its expression is frequently lost during breast cancer progression. In vitro models of human breast cancer indicate that the loss of maspin expression is closely linked to aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter. We conducted a study on 30 archival ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) specimens to determine if aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter occurred in vivo, and whether it occurred early in breast cancer evolution. Healthy tissue obtained from reduction mammoplasty was used as normal control. Results from immunohistochemical analysis indicate that maspin expression is lost in a substantial fraction of DCIS specimens (57%). Bisulfite sequencing of DNA isolated from laser capture-microdissected normal and neoplastic ducts showed that loss of maspin expression was often, but not always, linked to aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter, suggesting that other mechanisms, in addition to aberrant methylation, participate and/or cooperate to silence maspin gene expression. Taken together, these results indicate that aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter is an early event in human breast cancer.. The maspin gene functions as a tumor suppressor in human breasts, and its expression is frequently lost during breast cancer progression. In vitro models of human breast cancer indicate that the loss of maspin expression is closely linked to aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter. We conducted a study on 30 archival ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) specimens to determine if aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter occurred in vivo, and whether it occurred early in breast cancer evolution. Healthy tissue obtained from reduction mammoplasty was used as normal control. Results from immunohistochemical analysis indicate that maspin expression is lost in a substantial fraction of DCIS specimens (57%). Bisulfite sequencing of DNA isolated from laser capture-microdissected normal and neoplastic ducts showed that loss of maspin expression was often, but not always, linked to aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter, suggesting that other mechanisms, in addition to aberrant methylation, participate and/or cooperate to silence maspin gene expression. Taken together, these results indicate that aberrant methylation of the maspin promoter is an early event in human breast cancer.

Background: Biomarkers predicting response to bevacizumab in breast cancer are still missing. Since epigenetic modifications can contribute to an aberrant regulation of angiogenesis and treatment resistance, we investigated the influence of DNA methylation patterns on bevacizumab efficacy. Methods: Genome-wide methylation profiling using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was performed in archival FFPE specimens of 36 patients with HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer treated with chemotherapy in combination with bevacizumab as first-line therapy (learning set). Based on objective response and progression-free survival (PFS) and considering ER expression, patients were divided in responders (R) and non-responders (NR). Significantly differentially methylated gene loci (CpGs) with a strong change in methylation levels (Deltabeta>0.15 or Deltabeta<-0.15) between R and NR were identified and further investigated in 80 bevacizumab-treated breast cancer patients (optimization set) and in 15 patients treated with chemotherapy alone (control set) using targeted deep amplicon bisulfite sequencing. Methylated gene loci were considered predictive if there was a significant association with outcome (PFS) in the optimization set but not in the control set using Spearman rank correlation, Cox regression, and logrank test. Results: Differentially methylated loci in 48 genes were identified, allowing a good separation between R and NR (odds ratio (OR) 101, p<0.0001). Methylation of at least one cytosine in 26 gene-regions was significantly associated with progression-free survival (PFS) in the optimization set, but not in the control set. Using information from the optimization set, the panel was reduced to a 9-gene signature, which could divide patients from the learning set into 2 clusters, thereby predicting response with an OR of 40 (p<0.001) and an AUC of 0.91 (LOOCV). A further restricted 3-gene methylation model showed a significant association of predicted responders with longer PFS in the learning and optimization set even in multivariate analysis with an excellent and good separation of R and NR with AUC=0.94 and AUC=0.86, respectively. Conclusion: Both a 9-gene and 3-gene methylation signature can discriminate between R and NR to a bevacizumab-based therapy in MBC and could help identify patients deriving greater benefit from bevacizumab.. Background: Biomarkers predicting response to bevacizumab in breast cancer are still missing. Since epigenetic modifications can contribute to an aberrant regulation of angiogenesis and treatment resistance, we investigated the influence of DNA methylation patterns on bevacizumab efficacy. Methods: Genome-wide methylation profiling using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was performed in archival FFPE specimens of 36 patients with HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer treated with chemotherapy in combination with bevacizumab as first-line therapy (learning set). Based on objective response and progression-free survival (PFS) and considering ER expression, patients were divided in responders (R) and non-responders (NR). Significantly differentially methylated gene loci (CpGs) with a strong change in methylation levels (Deltabeta>0.15 or Deltabeta<-0.15) between R and NR were identified and further investigated in 80 bevacizumab-treated breast cancer patients (optimization set) and in 15 patients treated with chemotherapy alone (control set) using targeted deep amplicon bisulfite sequencing. Methylated gene loci were considered predictive if there was a significant association with outcome (PFS) in the optimization set but not in the control set using Spearman rank correlation, Cox regression, and logrank test. Results: Differentially methylated loci in 48 genes were identified, allowing a good separation between R and NR (odds ratio (OR) 101, p<0.0001). Methylation of at least one cytosine in 26 gene-regions was significantly associated with progression-free survival (PFS) in the optimization set, but not in the control set. Using information from the optimization set, the panel was reduced to a 9-gene signature, which could divide patients from the learning set into 2 clusters, thereby predicting response with an OR of 40 (p<0.001) and an AUC of 0.91 (LOOCV). A further restricted 3-gene methylation model showed a significant association of predicted responders with longer PFS in the learning and optimization set even in multivariate analysis with an excellent and good separation of R and NR with AUC=0.94 and AUC=0.86, respectively. Conclusion: Both a 9-gene and 3-gene methylation signature can discriminate between R and NR to a bevacizumab-based therapy in MBC and could help identify patients deriving greater benefit from bevacizumab.

To investigate the effects of feed condition and breed on the level of DNA methylation for the uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3) gene, which is an important candidate gene for regulating intramuscular fat (IMF) content in chicken breast muscle, breast muscle of Daninghe (DNH) and Qingjiaoma (QJM) chickens under scatter-feed and captivity-feed conditions was analyzed. Using RNA sequencing, 47 and 113 candidate genes were determined to be related to feed conditions and breed, respectively, and 7 differentially expressed genes were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR, including UCP3. The mRNA levels of UCP3 were significantly different between the 2 feed conditions. The DNA region from bp +1700 to +2459 of the UCP3 gene was studied using the bisulfite sequencing method and contained 46 methylation sites and 3 CpG islands. The results showed that the methylation level of this UCP3 region was lower in DNH chickens (0.77% to 0.88%, P = 0.012) and QJM chickens (0.88% to 0.91%, P = 0.20) under scatter-feed conditions than under captivity-feed conditions. The mean methylation level of UCP3 in DNH chickens was lower than that in QJM chickens under scatter-feed conditions (DNH to QJM, 0.77% to 0.88%, P = 0.007), which suggests that breed affects the mean methylation level of UCP3 under scatter-feed conditions. In summary, our findings suggest that feed condition and breed affect the methylation of UCP3 in chicken breast muscle.. To investigate the effects of feed condition and breed on the level of DNA methylation for the uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3) gene, which is an important candidate gene for regulating intramuscular fat (IMF) content in chicken breast muscle, breast muscle of Daninghe (DNH) and Qingjiaoma (QJM) chickens under scatter-feed and captivity-feed conditions was analyzed. Using RNA sequencing, 47 and 113 candidate genes were determined to be related to feed conditions and breed, respectively, and 7 differentially expressed genes were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR, including UCP3. The mRNA levels of UCP3 were significantly different between the 2 feed conditions. The DNA region from bp +1700 to +2459 of the UCP3 gene was studied using the bisulfite sequencing method and contained 46 methylation sites and 3 CpG islands. The results showed that the methylation level of this UCP3 region was lower in DNH chickens (0.77% to 0.88%, P = 0.012) and QJM chickens (0.88% to 0.91%, P = 0.20) under scatter-feed conditions than under captivity-feed conditions. The mean methylation level of UCP3 in DNH chickens was lower than that in QJM chickens under scatter-feed conditions (DNH to QJM, 0.77% to 0.88%, P = 0.007), which suggests that breed affects the mean methylation level of UCP3 under scatter-feed conditions. In summary, our findings suggest that feed condition and breed affect the methylation of UCP3 in chicken breast muscle.

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) always lacks expression in estrogen-dependent tumors, which may result from gene inactivation by methylation. In this study, we aimed to determine whether aberrant methylation of the ERbeta promoter is associated with decreased ERbeta gene expression in breast cancer. MATERIAL AND METHODS: ERbeta methylation status was determined for 132 pairs of breast cancer and adjacent normal tissues via the MethyLight method. Additionally, mRNA relative expression was quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to determine whether aberrant methylation had a negative correlation with expression. The correlation of ERbeta promoter methylation and clinical parameters is also discussed. RESULTS: Methylation was observed in 96 (72.7%) breast cancer samples, and the median percentage of fully methylated reference (PMR) among methylated tissues was 0.83. Meanwhile, 94 (71.2%) adjacent normal tissues were methylated and the median PMR was 0.48. Compared to adjacent normal tissues, the methylation level of breast cancer was significantly higher (p < 0.001) and mRNA expression was much lower (p < 0.001). There was a significant correlation between ERbeta methylation and mRNA expression in adjacent normal breast tissues (p = 0.004). In addition, the methylation rate of cancer tissues whose maximum diameter < 3 cm was significantly higher than those > 3 cm (p = 0.025). CONCLUSIONS: ERbeta promoter methylation level varies between cancerous and adjacent normal breast tissues. There was significant downregulation of ERbeta methylation expression in pre-cancerous stages of breast cancer. Therefore, demethylation drugs may offer a potential strategy for preventing the development of pre-cancerous cells.. INTRODUCTION: Estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) always lacks expression in estrogen-dependent tumors, which may result from gene inactivation by methylation. In this study, we aimed to determine whether aberrant methylation of the ERbeta promoter is associated with decreased ERbeta gene expression in breast cancer. MATERIAL AND METHODS: ERbeta methylation status was determined for 132 pairs of breast cancer and adjacent normal tissues via the MethyLight method. Additionally, mRNA relative expression was quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to determine whether aberrant methylation had a negative correlation with expression. The correlation of ERbeta promoter methylation and clinical parameters is also discussed. RESULTS: Methylation was observed in 96 (72.7%) breast cancer samples, and the median percentage of fully methylated reference (PMR) among methylated tissues was 0.83. Meanwhile, 94 (71.2%) adjacent normal tissues were methylated and the median PMR was 0.48. Compared to adjacent normal tissues, the methylation level of breast cancer was significantly higher (p < 0.001) and mRNA expression was much lower (p < 0.001). There was a significant correlation between ERbeta methylation and mRNA expression in adjacent normal breast tissues (p = 0.004). In addition, the methylation rate of cancer tissues whose maximum diameter < 3 cm was significantly higher than those > 3 cm (p = 0.025). CONCLUSIONS: ERbeta promoter methylation level varies between cancerous and adjacent normal breast tissues. There was significant downregulation of ERbeta methylation expression in pre-cancerous stages of breast cancer. Therefore, demethylation drugs may offer a potential strategy for preventing the development of pre-cancerous cells.

Normal tissue at risk of neoplastic transformation is characterized by somatic mutations, copy-number variation and DNA methylation changes. It is unclear however, which type of alteration may be more informative of cancer risk. We analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation and copy-number calls from the same DNA assay in a cohort of healthy breast samples and age-matched normal samples collected adjacent to breast cancer. Using statistical methods to adjust for cell type heterogeneity, we show that DNA methylation changes can discriminate normal-adjacent from normal samples better than somatic copy-number variants. We validate this important finding in an independent dataset. These results suggest that DNA methylation alterations in the normal cell of origin may offer better cancer risk prediction and early detection markers than copy-number changes.. Normal tissue at risk of neoplastic transformation is characterized by somatic mutations, copy-number variation and DNA methylation changes. It is unclear however, which type of alteration may be more informative of cancer risk. We analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation and copy-number calls from the same DNA assay in a cohort of healthy breast samples and age-matched normal samples collected adjacent to breast cancer. Using statistical methods to adjust for cell type heterogeneity, we show that DNA methylation changes can discriminate normal-adjacent from normal samples better than somatic copy-number variants. We validate this important finding in an independent dataset. These results suggest that DNA methylation alterations in the normal cell of origin may offer better cancer risk prediction and early detection markers than copy-number changes.

About 25-50% of women with Cowden disease, a syndrome associated with germ-line mutations of the PTEN gene (at 10q23), develop breast cancer (BC), but PTEN mutations have been found in only 5% of sporadic BCs. However, 29-48% of BCs display loss of heterozygosity in 10q23, and about 40% of BCs show a decrease or absence of PTEN protein levels at the time of diagnosis. Promoter hypermethylation has been identified as an alternative mechanism of tumor-suppressor gene inactivation, but its importance in PTEN silencing in sporadic BC is unknown. We investigated PTEN promoter hypermethylation in 90 sporadic BCs and its correlations with 11 molecular and pathologic parameters, including mRNA levels of PTEN. The study, a methylation-specific PCR assay, was carried out with methylated specific primers designed in a region with scarce homology with the psiPTEN pseudogene. Expression was analyzed by real-time PCR. We found that the PTEN promoter was hypermethylated in 43 BCs (48%). PTEN hypermethylation was associated with ERBB2 overexpression, larger size, and higher histologic grade (P=0.012, 0.03, and 0.009, respectively). We concluded that PTEN promoter hypermethylation is a common event in sporadic BC, correlating with other well-established prognostic factors of this malignancy. Additionally, PTEN mRNA expression was lower in tumors with aberrant methylation.. About 25-50% of women with Cowden disease, a syndrome associated with germ-line mutations of the PTEN gene (at 10q23), develop breast cancer (BC), but PTEN mutations have been found in only 5% of sporadic BCs. However, 29-48% of BCs display loss of heterozygosity in 10q23, and about 40% of BCs show a decrease or absence of PTEN protein levels at the time of diagnosis. Promoter hypermethylation has been identified as an alternative mechanism of tumor-suppressor gene inactivation, but its importance in PTEN silencing in sporadic BC is unknown. We investigated PTEN promoter hypermethylation in 90 sporadic BCs and its correlations with 11 molecular and pathologic parameters, including mRNA levels of PTEN. The study, a methylation-specific PCR assay, was carried out with methylated specific primers designed in a region with scarce homology with the psiPTEN pseudogene. Expression was analyzed by real-time PCR. We found that the PTEN promoter was hypermethylated in 43 BCs (48%). PTEN hypermethylation was associated with ERBB2 overexpression, larger size, and higher histologic grade (P=0.012, 0.03, and 0.009, respectively). We concluded that PTEN promoter hypermethylation is a common event in sporadic BC, correlating with other well-established prognostic factors of this malignancy. Additionally, PTEN mRNA expression was lower in tumors with aberrant methylation.

. 
BACKGROUND: In recent years, DNA methylation as a main epigenetic modification in human cancer is found as a promising biomarker in early detection of breast cancer. Possible applications of numerous hypermethylated genes have been reported in diagnosis of breast cancer but there has been a little comprehensive study on the clinical usefulness of these genes in breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to investigate the promoter methylation status of 14-3-3 sigma gene with the goal of developing a diagnostic application in breast cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Totally 40 cases of cancerous and noncancerous tissues were studied. DNA was extracted from tissue samples, and promoter methylation pattern was determined by using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: Methylation pattern of 14-3-3 sigma promoter significantly differed between control and malignant breast tissues (P = 0.001), and there was no remarkable correlation between methylation and age (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: The relationship of promoter methylation of 14-3-3 sigma with development of breast cancer found in this study and confirmed the results of previous reports suggests that we can provide the foundation for possible application of 14-3-3 sigma as a potential biomarker for early detection and monitoring disease status.. BACKGROUND: In recent years, DNA methylation as a main epigenetic modification in human cancer is found as a promising biomarker in early detection of breast cancer. Possible applications of numerous hypermethylated genes have been reported in diagnosis of breast cancer but there has been a little comprehensive study on the clinical usefulness of these genes in breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to investigate the promoter methylation status of 14-3-3 sigma gene with the goal of developing a diagnostic application in breast cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Totally 40 cases of cancerous and noncancerous tissues were studied. DNA was extracted from tissue samples, and promoter methylation pattern was determined by using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: Methylation pattern of 14-3-3 sigma promoter significantly differed between control and malignant breast tissues (P = 0.001), and there was no remarkable correlation between methylation and age (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: The relationship of promoter methylation of 14-3-3 sigma with development of breast cancer found in this study and confirmed the results of previous reports suggests that we can provide the foundation for possible application of 14-3-3 sigma as a potential biomarker for early detection and monitoring disease status.

Docetaxel is one of the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agents in breast cancer. To avert from significant toxicities with no clinical benefit, identification of predictive markers for response is one of the most important unsolved clinical needs. Therefore, the potential associations of RASSF1A hypermethylation and response to docetaxel-based chemotherapy were evaluated, and the underlying mechanism was studied. The expression of RASSF1A in breast cancer cell lines and tissues of normal breast, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and breast cancer (n=45) was analyzed by immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the expression of RASSF1A was frequently lost in primary breast cancers and human breast cancer cell lines, while normal breast tissues or DCIS displayed moderate to strong expression. Furthermore, quantitative methylation analysis of the RASSF1A promoter region in 45 primary breast cancers revealed that RASSF1A was frequently methylated in primary breast cancers (>/=20% methylation in 53% of the patients), and prospective analysis in patients with locally advanced or recurrent breast cancer showed that the mean level of methylation of RASSF1A was significantly higher in patients who did not respond to docetaxel-based chemotherapy (30.6+/-8.5%) than patients with partial or complete response (20.1+/-11.2%, p=0.042). Finally, in vitro studies showed that RASSF1A had cooperative activity in suppression of cancer cell growth and proliferation by enhancing docetaxel-induced cell cycle arrest. Our results suggest that hypermethylated RASSF1A is an important modulating factor for the efficacy of docetaxel-based chemotherapy in breast cancer.. Docetaxel is one of the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agents in breast cancer. To avert from significant toxicities with no clinical benefit, identification of predictive markers for response is one of the most important unsolved clinical needs. Therefore, the potential associations of RASSF1A hypermethylation and response to docetaxel-based chemotherapy were evaluated, and the underlying mechanism was studied. The expression of RASSF1A in breast cancer cell lines and tissues of normal breast, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and breast cancer (n=45) was analyzed by immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the expression of RASSF1A was frequently lost in primary breast cancers and human breast cancer cell lines, while normal breast tissues or DCIS displayed moderate to strong expression. Furthermore, quantitative methylation analysis of the RASSF1A promoter region in 45 primary breast cancers revealed that RASSF1A was frequently methylated in primary breast cancers (>/=20% methylation in 53% of the patients), and prospective analysis in patients with locally advanced or recurrent breast cancer showed that the mean level of methylation of RASSF1A was significantly higher in patients who did not respond to docetaxel-based chemotherapy (30.6+/-8.5%) than patients with partial or complete response (20.1+/-11.2%, p=0.042). Finally, in vitro studies showed that RASSF1A had cooperative activity in suppression of cancer cell growth and proliferation by enhancing docetaxel-induced cell cycle arrest. Our results suggest that hypermethylated RASSF1A is an important modulating factor for the efficacy of docetaxel-based chemotherapy in breast cancer.

Following the publication of this article, an interested reader drew to our attention that there were possible anomalies in the presentation of Fig. 5B in the above article. After having examined the figure, we recognized that several errors had indeed occurred during the process of compiling the figure. A corrected version of Fig. 5 is shown below, containing new data for Fig. 5B, after our having re-performed the western blot experiment according to the identical procedure detailed in the paper. We obtained broadly similar results to those featured originally in the article; therefore, the revision of this figure does not affect the conclusions reported in the study. We thank the reader of our article who drew this matter to our attention. [the original article was published in the International Journal of Oncology 41: 611-620, 2012; DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1470].. Following the publication of this article, an interested reader drew to our attention that there were possible anomalies in the presentation of Fig. 5B in the above article. After having examined the figure, we recognized that several errors had indeed occurred during the process of compiling the figure. A corrected version of Fig. 5 is shown below, containing new data for Fig. 5B, after our having re-performed the western blot experiment according to the identical procedure detailed in the paper. We obtained broadly similar results to those featured originally in the article; therefore, the revision of this figure does not affect the conclusions reported in the study. We thank the reader of our article who drew this matter to our attention. [the original article was published in the International Journal of Oncology 41: 611-620, 2012; DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1470].

PURPOSE: To examine DNA methylation as a mechanism linking diet, physical activity, weight status, and breast cancer risk. METHODS: Insufficiently active women of varying weight status, without a history of cancer, completed a maximal exercise test, clinical measurement of height and weight, and a dietary intake measure. They also provided blood samples, which were analyzed to ascertain average methylation of candidate genes related to breast cancer (BRCA1, RUNX3, GALNT9, and PAX6) and inflammation (TLR4 and TLR6). RESULTS: Elevated weight status (r = - .18, p < .05) and poorer aerobic fitness (r = .24, p < .01) were each associated with decreased methylation of inflammation genes. Methylation of inflammation genes statistically mediated the relationship between weight status and cancer gene methylation (standardized indirect effect = .12, p < .05) as well as between cardiorespiratory fitness and cancer gene methylation (standardized indirect effect = - .172, p < .01). However, recent dietary behavior was not associated with methylation of either inflammation or cancer genes. CONCLUSIONS: Both weight status and cardiovascular fitness are associated with methylation of genes associated with both inflammation and cancer. Methylation of inflammatory genes might serve as a mechanistic link between lifestyle factors and methylation changes in genes that increase risk for breast cancer.. PURPOSE: To examine DNA methylation as a mechanism linking diet, physical activity, weight status, and breast cancer risk. METHODS: Insufficiently active women of varying weight status, without a history of cancer, completed a maximal exercise test, clinical measurement of height and weight, and a dietary intake measure. They also provided blood samples, which were analyzed to ascertain average methylation of candidate genes related to breast cancer (BRCA1, RUNX3, GALNT9, and PAX6) and inflammation (TLR4 and TLR6). RESULTS: Elevated weight status (r = - .18, p < .05) and poorer aerobic fitness (r = .24, p < .01) were each associated with decreased methylation of inflammation genes. Methylation of inflammation genes statistically mediated the relationship between weight status and cancer gene methylation (standardized indirect effect = .12, p < .05) as well as between cardiorespiratory fitness and cancer gene methylation (standardized indirect effect = - .172, p < .01). However, recent dietary behavior was not associated with methylation of either inflammation or cancer genes. CONCLUSIONS: Both weight status and cardiovascular fitness are associated with methylation of genes associated with both inflammation and cancer. Methylation of inflammatory genes might serve as a mechanistic link between lifestyle factors and methylation changes in genes that increase risk for breast cancer.

AIM: Accumulated evidence suggests that aberrant methylation of the TP73 gene and increased levels of DeltaNp73 in primary tumours correlate with poor prognosis. However, little is known regarding the transcriptional and functional regulation of the TP73 gene in breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to determine the expression of the DeltaNp73 isoform, its relationship with DNA methylation of TP73 and their clinical prognostic significance in breast cancer patients. METHODS: TP73 gene methylation was studied in TCGA datasets and in 70 invasive ductal breast carcinomas (IDCs). The expression of p73 isoforms was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western blot and correlated with clinicopathological variables and clinical outcome. RESULTS: We observed that the methylation of diverse CpG islands of TP73 differed significantly between molecular subtypes. An inverse correlation was found between p73 protein expression and the methylation status of the TP73 gene. The expression of exon 3' of p73 (only expressed in DeltaNp73) was significantly higher in patients with wild-type p53. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that all p73 isoforms were localised in both the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. We confirmed a positive association between the expression of Np73 and high histological grade. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that high expression of DeltaNp73 could be used to determine the aggressiveness of IDCs and could be incorporated in the pathologist's report.. AIM: Accumulated evidence suggests that aberrant methylation of the TP73 gene and increased levels of DeltaNp73 in primary tumours correlate with poor prognosis. However, little is known regarding the transcriptional and functional regulation of the TP73 gene in breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to determine the expression of the DeltaNp73 isoform, its relationship with DNA methylation of TP73 and their clinical prognostic significance in breast cancer patients. METHODS: TP73 gene methylation was studied in TCGA datasets and in 70 invasive ductal breast carcinomas (IDCs). The expression of p73 isoforms was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Western blot and correlated with clinicopathological variables and clinical outcome. RESULTS: We observed that the methylation of diverse CpG islands of TP73 differed significantly between molecular subtypes. An inverse correlation was found between p73 protein expression and the methylation status of the TP73 gene. The expression of exon 3' of p73 (only expressed in DeltaNp73) was significantly higher in patients with wild-type p53. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that all p73 isoforms were localised in both the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. We confirmed a positive association between the expression of Np73 and high histological grade. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that high expression of DeltaNp73 could be used to determine the aggressiveness of IDCs and could be incorporated in the pathologist's report.

FOXA1 expression correlates with the breast cancer luminal subtype and patient survival. RNA and protein analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines revealed that BRCA1 deficiency is associated with the downregulation of FOXA1 expression. Knockdown of BRCA1 resulted in the downregulation of FOXA1 expression and enhancement of FOXA1 promoter methylation in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, whereas the reconstitution of BRCA1 in Brca1-deficent mouse mammary epithelial cells (MMECs) promoted Foxa1 expression and methylation. These data suggest that BRCA1 suppresses FOXA1 hypermethylation and silencing. Consistently, the treatment of MMECs with the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycitydine induced Foxa1 mRNA expression. Furthermore, treatment with GSK126, an inhibitor of EZH2 methyltransferase activity, induced FOXA1 expression in BRCA1-deficient but not in BRCA1-reconstituted MMECs. Likewise, the depletion of EZH2 by small interfering RNA enhanced FOXA1 mRNA expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated that BRCA1, EZH2, DNA methyltransferases (DNMT)1/3a/3b and H3K27me3 are recruited to the endogenous FOXA1 promoter, further supporting the hypothesis that these proteins interact to modulate FOXA1 methylation and repression. Further co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP analysis showed that both BRCA1 and DNMT3b form complexes with EZH2 but not with each other, consistent with the notion that BRCA1 binds to EZH2 and negatively regulates its methyltransferase activity. We also found that EZH2 promotes and BRCA1 impairs the deposit of the gene silencing histone mark H3K27me3 on the FOXA1 promoter. These associations were validated in a familial breast cancer patient cohort. Integrated analysis of the global gene methylation and expression profiles of a set of 33 familial breast tumours revealed that FOXA1 promoter methylation is inversely correlated with the transcriptional expression of FOXA1 and that BRCA1 mutation breast cancer is significantly associated with FOXA1 methylation and downregulation of FOXA1 expression, providing physiological evidence to our findings that FOXA1 expression is regulated by methylation and chromatin silencing and that BRCA1 maintains FOXA1 expression through suppressing FOXA1 gene methylation in breast cancer.. FOXA1 expression correlates with the breast cancer luminal subtype and patient survival. RNA and protein analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines revealed that BRCA1 deficiency is associated with the downregulation of FOXA1 expression. Knockdown of BRCA1 resulted in the downregulation of FOXA1 expression and enhancement of FOXA1 promoter methylation in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, whereas the reconstitution of BRCA1 in Brca1-deficent mouse mammary epithelial cells (MMECs) promoted Foxa1 expression and methylation. These data suggest that BRCA1 suppresses FOXA1 hypermethylation and silencing. Consistently, the treatment of MMECs with the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycitydine induced Foxa1 mRNA expression. Furthermore, treatment with GSK126, an inhibitor of EZH2 methyltransferase activity, induced FOXA1 expression in BRCA1-deficient but not in BRCA1-reconstituted MMECs. Likewise, the depletion of EZH2 by small interfering RNA enhanced FOXA1 mRNA expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated that BRCA1, EZH2, DNA methyltransferases (DNMT)1/3a/3b and H3K27me3 are recruited to the endogenous FOXA1 promoter, further supporting the hypothesis that these proteins interact to modulate FOXA1 methylation and repression. Further co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP analysis showed that both BRCA1 and DNMT3b form complexes with EZH2 but not with each other, consistent with the notion that BRCA1 binds to EZH2 and negatively regulates its methyltransferase activity. We also found that EZH2 promotes and BRCA1 impairs the deposit of the gene silencing histone mark H3K27me3 on the FOXA1 promoter. These associations were validated in a familial breast cancer patient cohort. Integrated analysis of the global gene methylation and expression profiles of a set of 33 familial breast tumours revealed that FOXA1 promoter methylation is inversely correlated with the transcriptional expression of FOXA1 and that BRCA1 mutation breast cancer is significantly associated with FOXA1 methylation and downregulation of FOXA1 expression, providing physiological evidence to our findings that FOXA1 expression is regulated by methylation and chromatin silencing and that BRCA1 maintains FOXA1 expression through suppressing FOXA1 gene methylation in breast cancer.

BRCA1 mutation or depletion correlates with basal-like phenotype and poor prognosis in breast cancer but the underlying reason remains elusive. RNA and protein analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines revealed that BRCA1 deficiency is associated with downregulation of the expression of the pleiotropic tumour suppressor FOXO3. Knockdown of BRCA1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in downregulation of FOXO3 expression in the BRCA1-competent MCF-7, whereas expression of BRCA1 restored FOXO3 expression in BRCA1-defective HCC70 and MDA-MB-468 cells, suggesting a role of BRCA1 in the control of FOXO3 expression. Treatment of HCC70 and MDA-MB-468 cells with either the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycitydine, the N-methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) inhibitor GSK126 or EZH2 siRNA induced FOXO3 mRNA and protein expression, but had no effect on the BRCA1-competent MCF-7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated that BRCA1, EZH2, DNMT1/3a/b and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) are recruited to the endogenous FOXO3 promoter, further advocating that these proteins interact to modulate FOXO3 methylation and expression. In addition, ChIP results also revealed that BRCA1 depletion promoted the recruitment of the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1/3a/3b and the enrichment of the EZH2-mediated transcriptional repressive epigenetic marks H3K27me3 on the FOXO3 promoter. Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation assays also confirmed increased CpG methylation of the FOXO3 gene on BRCA1 depletion. Analysis of the global gene methylation profiles of a cohort of 33 familial breast tumours revealed that FOXO3 promoter methylation is significantly associated with BRCA1 mutation. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry further suggested that FOXO3 expression was significantly associated with BRCA1 status in EZH2-positive breast cancer. Consistently, high FOXO3 and EZH2 mRNA levels were significantly associated with good and poor prognosis in breast cancer, respectively. Together, these data suggest that BRCA1 can prevent and reverse FOXO3 suppression via inhibiting EZH2 and, consequently, its ability to recruit the transcriptional repressive H3K27me3 histone marks and the DNA methylases DNMT1/3a/3b, to induce DNA methylation and gene silencing on the FOXO3 promoter.. BRCA1 mutation or depletion correlates with basal-like phenotype and poor prognosis in breast cancer but the underlying reason remains elusive. RNA and protein analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines revealed that BRCA1 deficiency is associated with downregulation of the expression of the pleiotropic tumour suppressor FOXO3. Knockdown of BRCA1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in downregulation of FOXO3 expression in the BRCA1-competent MCF-7, whereas expression of BRCA1 restored FOXO3 expression in BRCA1-defective HCC70 and MDA-MB-468 cells, suggesting a role of BRCA1 in the control of FOXO3 expression. Treatment of HCC70 and MDA-MB-468 cells with either the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycitydine, the N-methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) inhibitor GSK126 or EZH2 siRNA induced FOXO3 mRNA and protein expression, but had no effect on the BRCA1-competent MCF-7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated that BRCA1, EZH2, DNMT1/3a/b and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) are recruited to the endogenous FOXO3 promoter, further advocating that these proteins interact to modulate FOXO3 methylation and expression. In addition, ChIP results also revealed that BRCA1 depletion promoted the recruitment of the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1/3a/3b and the enrichment of the EZH2-mediated transcriptional repressive epigenetic marks H3K27me3 on the FOXO3 promoter. Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation assays also confirmed increased CpG methylation of the FOXO3 gene on BRCA1 depletion. Analysis of the global gene methylation profiles of a cohort of 33 familial breast tumours revealed that FOXO3 promoter methylation is significantly associated with BRCA1 mutation. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry further suggested that FOXO3 expression was significantly associated with BRCA1 status in EZH2-positive breast cancer. Consistently, high FOXO3 and EZH2 mRNA levels were significantly associated with good and poor prognosis in breast cancer, respectively. Together, these data suggest that BRCA1 can prevent and reverse FOXO3 suppression via inhibiting EZH2 and, consequently, its ability to recruit the transcriptional repressive H3K27me3 histone marks and the DNA methylases DNMT1/3a/3b, to induce DNA methylation and gene silencing on the FOXO3 promoter.

BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor gene TMS1 (target of methylation-induced silencing) has been described in the literature as a pro-apoptotic gene. This study examined the methylation status of TMS1 in breast cancer cells and its potential role in sensitivity to docetaxel chemotherapy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation of the TMS1 promoter was examined by methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and gene expression was analyzed by reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Apoptosis was evaluated by annexin V/propidium iodide staining followed by flow cytometric analysis. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The TMS1 promoter was unmethylated in ZR75-1, MB-231 and MCF7 cells which expressed the gene and partially methylated in SKBR3 and Hs578t cells in which TMS1 expression was down-regulated. Treatment of SKBR3 and Hs578t cells with demethylating agents resulted in reactivation of the TMS1 gene. Pretreatment with 5-azacytidine increased sensitivity to docetaxel treatment in SKBR3 and Hs578t cells, indicating that TMS1 reactivation in these cells may contribute to docetaxel sensitivity.. BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor gene TMS1 (target of methylation-induced silencing) has been described in the literature as a pro-apoptotic gene. This study examined the methylation status of TMS1 in breast cancer cells and its potential role in sensitivity to docetaxel chemotherapy. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation of the TMS1 promoter was examined by methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and gene expression was analyzed by reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Apoptosis was evaluated by annexin V/propidium iodide staining followed by flow cytometric analysis. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The TMS1 promoter was unmethylated in ZR75-1, MB-231 and MCF7 cells which expressed the gene and partially methylated in SKBR3 and Hs578t cells in which TMS1 expression was down-regulated. Treatment of SKBR3 and Hs578t cells with demethylating agents resulted in reactivation of the TMS1 gene. Pretreatment with 5-azacytidine increased sensitivity to docetaxel treatment in SKBR3 and Hs578t cells, indicating that TMS1 reactivation in these cells may contribute to docetaxel sensitivity.

TWIST1, an antiapoptotic and prometastatic transcription factor, is overexpressed in many epithelial cancers including breast. Only little is known regarding the regulation of TWIST1 in these cancers. Recently, an increase in the TWIST1 promoter methylation has been shown in breast cancers. To correlate the percentage of TWIST1 promoter methylation to the protein levels, we analyzed simultaneously the methylation status as well as the mRNA and the percentage of cells expressing TWIST1 in normal breast tissue and 76 invasive breast cancers. We found that TWIST1 promoter methylation is significantly more prevalent in malignant compared with healthy breast tissue. Furthermore, the percentage of cells expressing TWIST1 was greater in breast malignancy compared with matched healthy tissue from the same patients. There was no correlation, however, between TWIST1 promoter methylation and TWIST1 protein or RNA expression. This indicates that although TWIST1 CpG methylation is useful as a biomarker in breast cancer diagnosis, there is no direct correlation with TWIST1 expression.. TWIST1, an antiapoptotic and prometastatic transcription factor, is overexpressed in many epithelial cancers including breast. Only little is known regarding the regulation of TWIST1 in these cancers. Recently, an increase in the TWIST1 promoter methylation has been shown in breast cancers. To correlate the percentage of TWIST1 promoter methylation to the protein levels, we analyzed simultaneously the methylation status as well as the mRNA and the percentage of cells expressing TWIST1 in normal breast tissue and 76 invasive breast cancers. We found that TWIST1 promoter methylation is significantly more prevalent in malignant compared with healthy breast tissue. Furthermore, the percentage of cells expressing TWIST1 was greater in breast malignancy compared with matched healthy tissue from the same patients. There was no correlation, however, between TWIST1 promoter methylation and TWIST1 protein or RNA expression. This indicates that although TWIST1 CpG methylation is useful as a biomarker in breast cancer diagnosis, there is no direct correlation with TWIST1 expression.

In a number of human cancers, NTN1 upregulation inhibits apoptosis induced by its so-called dependence receptors DCC and UNC5H, thus promoting tumor progression. In other cancers however, the selective inhibition of this dependence receptor death pathway relies on the silencing of pro-apoptotic effector proteins. We show here that a substantial fraction of human breast tumors exhibits simultaneous DNA methylation-dependent loss of expression of NTN1 and of DAPK1, a serine threonine kinase known to transduce the netrin-1 dependence receptor pro-apoptotic pathway. The inhibition of DNA methylation by drugs such as decitabine restores the expression of both NTN1 and DAPK1 in netrin-1-low cancer cells. Furthermore, a combination of decitabine with NTN1 silencing strategies or with an anti-netrin-1 neutralizing antibody potentiates tumor cell death and efficiently blocks tumor growth in different animal models. Thus, combining DNA methylation inhibitors with netrin-1 neutralizing agents may be a valuable strategy for combating cancer.. In a number of human cancers, NTN1 upregulation inhibits apoptosis induced by its so-called dependence receptors DCC and UNC5H, thus promoting tumor progression. In other cancers however, the selective inhibition of this dependence receptor death pathway relies on the silencing of pro-apoptotic effector proteins. We show here that a substantial fraction of human breast tumors exhibits simultaneous DNA methylation-dependent loss of expression of NTN1 and of DAPK1, a serine threonine kinase known to transduce the netrin-1 dependence receptor pro-apoptotic pathway. The inhibition of DNA methylation by drugs such as decitabine restores the expression of both NTN1 and DAPK1 in netrin-1-low cancer cells. Furthermore, a combination of decitabine with NTN1 silencing strategies or with an anti-netrin-1 neutralizing antibody potentiates tumor cell death and efficiently blocks tumor growth in different animal models. Thus, combining DNA methylation inhibitors with netrin-1 neutralizing agents may be a valuable strategy for combating cancer.

Cadherin-1 (CHD1), as an invasion suppressor gene, could suppress tumor cell invasion and metastasis in various tumors, but reduced CHD1 levels, resulting from epigenetic silencing, are common in poorly differentiated, advanced stage carcinomas. This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the relationships between promoter methylation of CHD1 and breast cancer. Relevant studies were retrieved from the Web of Science (1945 ~ 2013), the Cochrane Library (Issue 12, 2013), PubMed (1966 ~ 2013), EMBASE (1980 ~ 2013), CINAHL (1982 ~ 2013), and the Chinese Biomedical Database (CBM) (1982 ~ 2013) using a systematic literature search. Results were summarized by meta-analyses, conducted using the STATA software (version 12.0, Stata Corporation, College Station, TX, USA). Odds ratios (ORs) and 95 % confidence intervals (95 % CIs) were calculated. In the present meta-analysis, 9 cohort studies with a total of 425 patients with breast cancer were included. Our meta-analysis results demonstrated that the frequency of CHD1 promoter methylation in cancer tissues was significantly higher than that in normal tissues, adjacent tissues, and benign tissues (cancer tissue vs. normal tissue OR = 30.87, 95 % CI = 16.76 ~ 56.86, P < 0.001; cancer tissue vs. adjacent tissue OR = 23.30, 95 % CI = 12.85 ~ 42.26, P < 0.001; cancer tissue vs. benign tissue OR = 2.94, 95 % CI = 1.60 ~ 5.40, P < 0.001; respectively). Ethnicity-stratified analysis indicated that aberrant CHD1 promoter methylation was strongly correlated with breast cancer among both Asians and Caucasians in the majority of subgroups. Our results suggest that aberrant promoter methylation of the CHD1 gene may have a high frequency in breast cancer tissues. Thus, CHD1 methylation could be correlated with the pathogenesis of breast cancer.. Cadherin-1 (CHD1), as an invasion suppressor gene, could suppress tumor cell invasion and metastasis in various tumors, but reduced CHD1 levels, resulting from epigenetic silencing, are common in poorly differentiated, advanced stage carcinomas. This meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the relationships between promoter methylation of CHD1 and breast cancer. Relevant studies were retrieved from the Web of Science (1945 ~ 2013), the Cochrane Library (Issue 12, 2013), PubMed (1966 ~ 2013), EMBASE (1980 ~ 2013), CINAHL (1982 ~ 2013), and the Chinese Biomedical Database (CBM) (1982 ~ 2013) using a systematic literature search. Results were summarized by meta-analyses, conducted using the STATA software (version 12.0, Stata Corporation, College Station, TX, USA). Odds ratios (ORs) and 95 % confidence intervals (95 % CIs) were calculated. In the present meta-analysis, 9 cohort studies with a total of 425 patients with breast cancer were included. Our meta-analysis results demonstrated that the frequency of CHD1 promoter methylation in cancer tissues was significantly higher than that in normal tissues, adjacent tissues, and benign tissues (cancer tissue vs. normal tissue OR = 30.87, 95 % CI = 16.76 ~ 56.86, P < 0.001; cancer tissue vs. adjacent tissue OR = 23.30, 95 % CI = 12.85 ~ 42.26, P < 0.001; cancer tissue vs. benign tissue OR = 2.94, 95 % CI = 1.60 ~ 5.40, P < 0.001; respectively). Ethnicity-stratified analysis indicated that aberrant CHD1 promoter methylation was strongly correlated with breast cancer among both Asians and Caucasians in the majority of subgroups. Our results suggest that aberrant promoter methylation of the CHD1 gene may have a high frequency in breast cancer tissues. Thus, CHD1 methylation could be correlated with the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of DNA methylation in the regulation of BCSG1 gene expression in breast tissues derived from Chinese women with breast cancer. METHODS: The methylation status of exon 1 of the BCSG1 gene in breast cancer, and matched non-neoplastic adjacent and benign lesion tissues was extensively examined using methylation-specific PCR analysis. Corresponding mRNA expression levels were determined by real-time PCR. RESULTS: We found: (1) the BCSG1 gene was universally demethylated in all breast tissues regardless of the tissue state, although 50-60% of the samples displayed methylated products as well; (2) DNA methylation correlated to the expression of the BCSG1 gene in tumor tissues, but not in non-neoplastic adjacent and benign tissues; (3) breast tumor tissues expressed lower BCSG1 than non-neoplastic adjacent tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed a unique expression pattern and methylation status of the BCSG1 gene in breast tissues derived from Chinese patients and suggested both methylation status and mechanisms underlying BCSG1 regulation might be closely related to the racial background.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of DNA methylation in the regulation of BCSG1 gene expression in breast tissues derived from Chinese women with breast cancer. METHODS: The methylation status of exon 1 of the BCSG1 gene in breast cancer, and matched non-neoplastic adjacent and benign lesion tissues was extensively examined using methylation-specific PCR analysis. Corresponding mRNA expression levels were determined by real-time PCR. RESULTS: We found: (1) the BCSG1 gene was universally demethylated in all breast tissues regardless of the tissue state, although 50-60% of the samples displayed methylated products as well; (2) DNA methylation correlated to the expression of the BCSG1 gene in tumor tissues, but not in non-neoplastic adjacent and benign tissues; (3) breast tumor tissues expressed lower BCSG1 than non-neoplastic adjacent tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed a unique expression pattern and methylation status of the BCSG1 gene in breast tissues derived from Chinese patients and suggested both methylation status and mechanisms underlying BCSG1 regulation might be closely related to the racial background.

Whole-blood DNA methylation markers have been suggested as potential biomarkers for early detection of breast cancer. We conducted a systematic review of the literature on whole-blood DNA methylation markers for breast cancer detection. PubMed and ISI Web of Knowledge were searched up to May 29, 2018. Overall, 33 studies evaluating 355 markers were included. The diagnostic value of most individual markers was relatively modest, with only six markers showing sensitivity >40% at specificity >75% [only 2 (HYAL2 and S100P) were independently validated]. Although relatively strong associations (OR </=0.5 or OR >/=2) with breast cancer were reported for 14 markers, most of them were not independently validated. Two prospective studies performed epigenome-wide association analysis and identified 276 CpG sites related to breast cancer risk, but no overlap was observed between CpGs reported from these two studies. Five studies incorporated individual markers as panels, but only two of them used a test-validation approach. In conclusion, so far detected methylation markers are insufficient for breast cancer early detection, but markers or marker-combinations may be useful for breast cancer risk stratification. Utilizing high-throughput methods of methylation quantification, future studies should focus on further mining informative methylation markers and derivation of enhanced multimaker panels with thorough external validation ideally in prospective settings.. Whole-blood DNA methylation markers have been suggested as potential biomarkers for early detection of breast cancer. We conducted a systematic review of the literature on whole-blood DNA methylation markers for breast cancer detection. PubMed and ISI Web of Knowledge were searched up to May 29, 2018. Overall, 33 studies evaluating 355 markers were included. The diagnostic value of most individual markers was relatively modest, with only six markers showing sensitivity >40% at specificity >75% [only 2 (HYAL2 and S100P) were independently validated]. Although relatively strong associations (OR </=0.5 or OR >/=2) with breast cancer were reported for 14 markers, most of them were not independently validated. Two prospective studies performed epigenome-wide association analysis and identified 276 CpG sites related to breast cancer risk, but no overlap was observed between CpGs reported from these two studies. Five studies incorporated individual markers as panels, but only two of them used a test-validation approach. In conclusion, so far detected methylation markers are insufficient for breast cancer early detection, but markers or marker-combinations may be useful for breast cancer risk stratification. Utilizing high-throughput methods of methylation quantification, future studies should focus on further mining informative methylation markers and derivation of enhanced multimaker panels with thorough external validation ideally in prospective settings.

Methylation alterations of CpG islands, CpG island shores and first exons are key events in the formation and progression of human cancer, and an increasing number of differentially methylated regions and genes have been identified in breast cancer. Recent studies of the breast cancer methylome using deep sequencing and microarray platforms are providing a novel insight on the different roles aberrant methylation plays in molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Accumulating evidence from a subset of studies suggests that promoter methylation of tumor-suppressor genes associated with breast cancer can be quantified in circulating DNA. However, there is a paucity of studies that examine the combined presence of genetic and epigenetic alterations associated with breast cancer using blood-based assays. Dysregulation of DNA repair capacity (DRC) is a genetic risk factor for breast cancer that has been measured in lymphocytes. We isolated plasma DNA from 340 participants in a breast cancer case control project to study promoter methylation levels of five genes previously shown to be associated with breast cancer in frozen tissue and in cell line DNA: MAL, KIF1A, FKBP4, VGF and OGDHL. Methylation of at least one gene was found in 49% of the cases compared to 20% of the controls. Three of the four genes had receiver characteristic operator curve values of >/= 0.50: MAL (0.64), KIF1A (0.51) and OGDHL (0.53). KIF1A promoter methylation was associated with breast cancer and inversely associated with DRC. This is the first evidence of a significant association between genetic and epigenetic alterations in breast cancer using blood-based tests. The potential diagnostic utility of these biomarkers and their relevance for breast cancer risk prediction should be examined in larger cohorts.. Methylation alterations of CpG islands, CpG island shores and first exons are key events in the formation and progression of human cancer, and an increasing number of differentially methylated regions and genes have been identified in breast cancer. Recent studies of the breast cancer methylome using deep sequencing and microarray platforms are providing a novel insight on the different roles aberrant methylation plays in molecular subtypes of breast cancer. Accumulating evidence from a subset of studies suggests that promoter methylation of tumor-suppressor genes associated with breast cancer can be quantified in circulating DNA. However, there is a paucity of studies that examine the combined presence of genetic and epigenetic alterations associated with breast cancer using blood-based assays. Dysregulation of DNA repair capacity (DRC) is a genetic risk factor for breast cancer that has been measured in lymphocytes. We isolated plasma DNA from 340 participants in a breast cancer case control project to study promoter methylation levels of five genes previously shown to be associated with breast cancer in frozen tissue and in cell line DNA: MAL, KIF1A, FKBP4, VGF and OGDHL. Methylation of at least one gene was found in 49% of the cases compared to 20% of the controls. Three of the four genes had receiver characteristic operator curve values of >/= 0.50: MAL (0.64), KIF1A (0.51) and OGDHL (0.53). KIF1A promoter methylation was associated with breast cancer and inversely associated with DRC. This is the first evidence of a significant association between genetic and epigenetic alterations in breast cancer using blood-based tests. The potential diagnostic utility of these biomarkers and their relevance for breast cancer risk prediction should be examined in larger cohorts.

The activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway has been demonstrated to play important roles in breast carcinogenesis and to be associated with a poorer prognosis in breast cancer patients. However, genetic mutation is not the major reason for Wnt/beta-catenin activation in breast cancer. Dishevelled-associated antagonist of beta-catenin homolog 2 (DACT2) is a negative regulator of beta-catenin and acts as a tumor suppressor in numerous cancer types; however, the expression change and potential role of DACT2 in breast cancer is unknown. The present study detected the expression and function of DACT2 in breast cancer progression. It was identified that the expression of DACT2 significantly decreased in breast cancer tissues compared with paired adjacent normal breast tissues. Additional investigation demonstrated that the hypermethylation of DACT2 gene promoter contributes to the loss of the gene in breast cancer. It was also demonstrated that DACT2 is a tumor suppressor in breast cancer and inhibits the proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells by repressing the expression of beta-catenin target genes associated with tumor growth and metastasis. The present study indicates that the loss of DACT2 may contribute to breast cancer progression and provides a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer.. The activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway has been demonstrated to play important roles in breast carcinogenesis and to be associated with a poorer prognosis in breast cancer patients. However, genetic mutation is not the major reason for Wnt/beta-catenin activation in breast cancer. Dishevelled-associated antagonist of beta-catenin homolog 2 (DACT2) is a negative regulator of beta-catenin and acts as a tumor suppressor in numerous cancer types; however, the expression change and potential role of DACT2 in breast cancer is unknown. The present study detected the expression and function of DACT2 in breast cancer progression. It was identified that the expression of DACT2 significantly decreased in breast cancer tissues compared with paired adjacent normal breast tissues. Additional investigation demonstrated that the hypermethylation of DACT2 gene promoter contributes to the loss of the gene in breast cancer. It was also demonstrated that DACT2 is a tumor suppressor in breast cancer and inhibits the proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells by repressing the expression of beta-catenin target genes associated with tumor growth and metastasis. The present study indicates that the loss of DACT2 may contribute to breast cancer progression and provides a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer.

Aberrant methylation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) promoter is a mechanism for its functional inactivation. It may potentially be used as a prognostic marker in studies for patients with breast cancer and plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Numerous studies have suggested that the methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is associated with the prognosis of breast cancer. However, the prognosis of BRCA1 promoter methylation in breast cancer patients of different ethnicities remains ambiguous. The present meta-analysis was performed to adjust and augment a previously published study, which estimated the correlations between promoter methylation of BRCA1 and the clinical outcomes of breast cancer patients. These results indicated that BRCA1 methylation was significantly correlated with a poor prognosis of breast cancer, particularly for Asian patients, but the correlation was over-estimated in the previous study. The combined hazard ratios (HRs) in the present study were 1.76 (1.15-2.68) and 1.97 (1.12-3.44) for univariate and multivariate analysis of overall survival, which were different from 2.02 (1.35-3.03) and 1.38 (1.04-1.84) in the previous study. For studies of disease-free survival, the univariate and multivariate analyses also have different pooled HRs: 2.89 (1.73-4.83) and 3.92 (1.49-10.32) in the previously published study and 1.28 (0.68-2.43) and 1.64 (0.64-4.19) in the present study. In addition, the BRCA1 promoter regions used to detect the hypermethylation were different. All the studies using the Baldwin's primer reported that breast cancer patients with BRCA1 promoter methylation had a better prognosis. There were also correlations between BRCA1 promoter methylation and receptor-negativity of the estrogen receptors, progesterone receptor, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 and a triple-negative status. Patients with the estrogen, progesterone and epidermal growth factor-related receptor-negative status were more likely to be negative for the BRCA1 protein.. Aberrant methylation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) promoter is a mechanism for its functional inactivation. It may potentially be used as a prognostic marker in studies for patients with breast cancer and plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Numerous studies have suggested that the methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is associated with the prognosis of breast cancer. However, the prognosis of BRCA1 promoter methylation in breast cancer patients of different ethnicities remains ambiguous. The present meta-analysis was performed to adjust and augment a previously published study, which estimated the correlations between promoter methylation of BRCA1 and the clinical outcomes of breast cancer patients. These results indicated that BRCA1 methylation was significantly correlated with a poor prognosis of breast cancer, particularly for Asian patients, but the correlation was over-estimated in the previous study. The combined hazard ratios (HRs) in the present study were 1.76 (1.15-2.68) and 1.97 (1.12-3.44) for univariate and multivariate analysis of overall survival, which were different from 2.02 (1.35-3.03) and 1.38 (1.04-1.84) in the previous study. For studies of disease-free survival, the univariate and multivariate analyses also have different pooled HRs: 2.89 (1.73-4.83) and 3.92 (1.49-10.32) in the previously published study and 1.28 (0.68-2.43) and 1.64 (0.64-4.19) in the present study. In addition, the BRCA1 promoter regions used to detect the hypermethylation were different. All the studies using the Baldwin's primer reported that breast cancer patients with BRCA1 promoter methylation had a better prognosis. There were also correlations between BRCA1 promoter methylation and receptor-negativity of the estrogen receptors, progesterone receptor, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 and a triple-negative status. Patients with the estrogen, progesterone and epidermal growth factor-related receptor-negative status were more likely to be negative for the BRCA1 protein.

Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a member of the serine protease family and can break down various components of the extracellular matrix to promote growth, invasion, and metastasis of several malignancies including breast cancer. In the current study we examined the role that the DNA methylation machinery might be playing in regulating differential uPA gene expression in breast cancer cell lines. uPA mRNA is expressed in the highly invasive, hormone-insensitive human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 but not in hormone-responsive cell line MCF-7. Using methylation-sensitive PCR, we show that 90% of CpG dinucleotides in the uPA promoter are methylated in MCF-7 cells, whereas fully demethylated CpGs were detected in MDA-MB-231 cells. uPA promoter activity, which is directly regulated by the Ets-1 transcription factor, is inhibited by methylation as determined by uPA promoter-luciferase reporter assays. We then tested whether the state of expression and methylation of the uPA promoter correlates with the global level of DNA methyltransferase and demethylase activities in these cell lines. We show that maintenance DNA methyltransferase activity is significantly higher in MCF-7 cells than in MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas demethylase activity is higher in MDA-MB-231 cells. We suggest that the combination of increased DNA methyltransferase activity with reduced demethylase activity contributes to the methylation and silencing of uPA expression in MCF-7 cells. The converse is true in MDA-MB-231 cells, which represents a late stage highly invasive breast cancer. The histone deacetylase inhibitor, Trichostatin A, induces the expression of the uPA gene in MDA-MB-231 cells but not in MCF-7 cells. This supports the hypothesis that DNA methylation is the dominant mechanism involved in the silencing of uPA gene expression. Taken together, these results provide insight into the mechanism regulating the transcription of the uPA gene in the complex multistep process of breast cancer progression.. Urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) is a member of the serine protease family and can break down various components of the extracellular matrix to promote growth, invasion, and metastasis of several malignancies including breast cancer. In the current study we examined the role that the DNA methylation machinery might be playing in regulating differential uPA gene expression in breast cancer cell lines. uPA mRNA is expressed in the highly invasive, hormone-insensitive human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 but not in hormone-responsive cell line MCF-7. Using methylation-sensitive PCR, we show that 90% of CpG dinucleotides in the uPA promoter are methylated in MCF-7 cells, whereas fully demethylated CpGs were detected in MDA-MB-231 cells. uPA promoter activity, which is directly regulated by the Ets-1 transcription factor, is inhibited by methylation as determined by uPA promoter-luciferase reporter assays. We then tested whether the state of expression and methylation of the uPA promoter correlates with the global level of DNA methyltransferase and demethylase activities in these cell lines. We show that maintenance DNA methyltransferase activity is significantly higher in MCF-7 cells than in MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas demethylase activity is higher in MDA-MB-231 cells. We suggest that the combination of increased DNA methyltransferase activity with reduced demethylase activity contributes to the methylation and silencing of uPA expression in MCF-7 cells. The converse is true in MDA-MB-231 cells, which represents a late stage highly invasive breast cancer. The histone deacetylase inhibitor, Trichostatin A, induces the expression of the uPA gene in MDA-MB-231 cells but not in MCF-7 cells. This supports the hypothesis that DNA methylation is the dominant mechanism involved in the silencing of uPA gene expression. Taken together, these results provide insight into the mechanism regulating the transcription of the uPA gene in the complex multistep process of breast cancer progression.

It has been proposed that methylation signatures in blood-derived DNA may correlate with cancer risk. In this study, we evaluated whether methylation of the promoter region of the BRCA1 gene detectable in DNA from peripheral blood cells is a risk factor for breast cancer, in particular for tumors with pathologic features characteristic for cancers with BRCA1 gene mutations. We conducted a case-control study of 66 breast cancer cases and 36 unaffected controls. Cases were triple-negative or of medullary histology, or both; 30 carried a constitutional BRCA1 mutation and 36 did not carry a mutation. Blood for DNA methylation analysis was taken within three months of diagnosis. Methylation of the promoter of the BRCA1 gene was measured in cases and controls using methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM). A sample with any detectable level of methylation was considered to be positive. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in 15 of 66 cases and in 2 of 36 controls (OR 5.0, p = 0.03). Methylation was present in 15 of 36 women with breast cancer and without germline BRCA1 mutation, but in none of 30 women with breast cancer and a germline mutation (p < 0.01). The association between methylation and breast cancer was restricted to women with no constitutional BRCA1 mutation (OR 12.1, p = 0.0006). Methylation of the promoter of the BRCA1 gene detectable in peripheral blood DNA may be a marker of increased susceptibility to triple-negative or medullary breast cancer.. It has been proposed that methylation signatures in blood-derived DNA may correlate with cancer risk. In this study, we evaluated whether methylation of the promoter region of the BRCA1 gene detectable in DNA from peripheral blood cells is a risk factor for breast cancer, in particular for tumors with pathologic features characteristic for cancers with BRCA1 gene mutations. We conducted a case-control study of 66 breast cancer cases and 36 unaffected controls. Cases were triple-negative or of medullary histology, or both; 30 carried a constitutional BRCA1 mutation and 36 did not carry a mutation. Blood for DNA methylation analysis was taken within three months of diagnosis. Methylation of the promoter of the BRCA1 gene was measured in cases and controls using methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM). A sample with any detectable level of methylation was considered to be positive. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in 15 of 66 cases and in 2 of 36 controls (OR 5.0, p = 0.03). Methylation was present in 15 of 36 women with breast cancer and without germline BRCA1 mutation, but in none of 30 women with breast cancer and a germline mutation (p < 0.01). The association between methylation and breast cancer was restricted to women with no constitutional BRCA1 mutation (OR 12.1, p = 0.0006). Methylation of the promoter of the BRCA1 gene detectable in peripheral blood DNA may be a marker of increased susceptibility to triple-negative or medullary breast cancer.

DNA methylation has a substantial impact on gene expression, affecting the prognosis of breast cancer (BC) patients dependent on molecular subtypes. In this study, we investigated the prognostic relevance of the expression of genes reported as aberrantly methylated, and the link between gene expression and DNA methylation in BC subtypes. The prognostic value of the expression of 144 aberrantly methylated genes was evaluated in ER+/HER2-, HER2+, and ER-/HER2- molecular BC subtypes, in a meta-analysis of two large transcriptomic cohorts of BC patients (n = 1,938 and n = 1,640). The correlation between gene expression and DNA methylation in distinct gene regions was also investigated in an independent dataset of 104 BCs. Survival and Pearson correlation analyses were computed for each gene separately. The expression of 48 genes was significantly associated with BC prognosis (p < 0.05), and 32 of these prognostic genes exhibited a direct expression-methylation correlation. The expression of several immune-related genes, including CD3D and HLA-A, was associated with both relapse-free survival (HR = 0.42, p = 3.5E-06; HR = 0.35, p = 1.7E-08) and overall survival (HR = 0.50, p = 5.5E-04; HR = 0.68, p = 4.5E-02) in ER-/HER2- BCs. On the overall, the distribution of both positive and negative expression-methylation correlation in distinct gene regions have different effects on gene expression and prognosis in BC subtypes. This large-scale meta-analysis allowed the identification of several genes consistently associated with prognosis, whose DNA methylation could represent a promising biomarker for prognostication and clinical stratification of patients with distinct BC subtypes.. DNA methylation has a substantial impact on gene expression, affecting the prognosis of breast cancer (BC) patients dependent on molecular subtypes. In this study, we investigated the prognostic relevance of the expression of genes reported as aberrantly methylated, and the link between gene expression and DNA methylation in BC subtypes. The prognostic value of the expression of 144 aberrantly methylated genes was evaluated in ER+/HER2-, HER2+, and ER-/HER2- molecular BC subtypes, in a meta-analysis of two large transcriptomic cohorts of BC patients (n = 1,938 and n = 1,640). The correlation between gene expression and DNA methylation in distinct gene regions was also investigated in an independent dataset of 104 BCs. Survival and Pearson correlation analyses were computed for each gene separately. The expression of 48 genes was significantly associated with BC prognosis (p < 0.05), and 32 of these prognostic genes exhibited a direct expression-methylation correlation. The expression of several immune-related genes, including CD3D and HLA-A, was associated with both relapse-free survival (HR = 0.42, p = 3.5E-06; HR = 0.35, p = 1.7E-08) and overall survival (HR = 0.50, p = 5.5E-04; HR = 0.68, p = 4.5E-02) in ER-/HER2- BCs. On the overall, the distribution of both positive and negative expression-methylation correlation in distinct gene regions have different effects on gene expression and prognosis in BC subtypes. This large-scale meta-analysis allowed the identification of several genes consistently associated with prognosis, whose DNA methylation could represent a promising biomarker for prognostication and clinical stratification of patients with distinct BC subtypes.

BACKGROUND: Status of DNA methylation is one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia. Because it is possible to detect these epigenetic alterations in the bloodstream of patients, we investigated the aberrant DNA methylation status of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) in patient pretherapeutic sera and tissue. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this case control study the patient series consisted of 120 sporadic primary breast cancer cases and 100 patients with benign breast lesion. ER3, ER4, and ER5 primers were used for methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) to analyze the CpG methylation of promoter region of ERalpha gene. Correlation between ER3, ER4, and ER5 methylation and clinicopathological characteristics of the patients was investigated. RESULT: The methylation status of ER3, ER4 and ER5 was 65%, 26.7% and 61.7% in tissue respectively and 57.5%, 21.7% and 55.8% in serum respectively. The concordance between tumor and serum DNA methylation was 80%, 72% and 92% for ER3, ER4 and ER5 respectively. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated the potential utility of serum DNA methylation of ERalpha gene promoter as a non-invasive diagnostic and/or prognostic marker in patients with breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Status of DNA methylation is one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia. Because it is possible to detect these epigenetic alterations in the bloodstream of patients, we investigated the aberrant DNA methylation status of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) in patient pretherapeutic sera and tissue. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this case control study the patient series consisted of 120 sporadic primary breast cancer cases and 100 patients with benign breast lesion. ER3, ER4, and ER5 primers were used for methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) to analyze the CpG methylation of promoter region of ERalpha gene. Correlation between ER3, ER4, and ER5 methylation and clinicopathological characteristics of the patients was investigated. RESULT: The methylation status of ER3, ER4 and ER5 was 65%, 26.7% and 61.7% in tissue respectively and 57.5%, 21.7% and 55.8% in serum respectively. The concordance between tumor and serum DNA methylation was 80%, 72% and 92% for ER3, ER4 and ER5 respectively. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated the potential utility of serum DNA methylation of ERalpha gene promoter as a non-invasive diagnostic and/or prognostic marker in patients with breast cancer.

Recently genetics and epigenetics alterations have been found to be characteristic of malignancy and hence can be used as targets for detection of neoplasia. RAS association domain family protein 1A (RASSF1A) gene hypermethylation has been a subject of interest in recent researches on cancer breast patients. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether RASSF1A methylation status and RASSF1A protein expression are associated with the major clinico-pathological parameters. One hundred and twenty breast cancer Egyptian patients and 100-control subjects diagnosed with benign lesions of the breast were enrolled in this study. We evaluated RASSF1A methylation status in tissue and serum samples using Methyl specific PCR together with RASSF1A protein expression in tissues by immunohistochemistry. Results were studied in relation to known prognostic clinicopathological features in breast cancer. Frequency of RASSF1A methylation in tissues and serum were 70 and 63.3 % respectively and RASSF1A protein expression showed frequency of 46.7 %. There was an association between RASSF1A methylation in tissues, serum and loss of protein expression in tissues with invasive carcinoma, advanced stage breast cancer, L.N. metastasis, ER/PR and HER2 negativity. RASSF1A methylation in serum showed high degree of concordance with methylation in tissues (Kappa = 0.851, P < 0.001). RASSF1A hypermethylation in tissues and serum and its protein expression may be a valid, reliable and sensitive tool for detection and follow up of breast cancer patients.. Recently genetics and epigenetics alterations have been found to be characteristic of malignancy and hence can be used as targets for detection of neoplasia. RAS association domain family protein 1A (RASSF1A) gene hypermethylation has been a subject of interest in recent researches on cancer breast patients. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether RASSF1A methylation status and RASSF1A protein expression are associated with the major clinico-pathological parameters. One hundred and twenty breast cancer Egyptian patients and 100-control subjects diagnosed with benign lesions of the breast were enrolled in this study. We evaluated RASSF1A methylation status in tissue and serum samples using Methyl specific PCR together with RASSF1A protein expression in tissues by immunohistochemistry. Results were studied in relation to known prognostic clinicopathological features in breast cancer. Frequency of RASSF1A methylation in tissues and serum were 70 and 63.3 % respectively and RASSF1A protein expression showed frequency of 46.7 %. There was an association between RASSF1A methylation in tissues, serum and loss of protein expression in tissues with invasive carcinoma, advanced stage breast cancer, L.N. metastasis, ER/PR and HER2 negativity. RASSF1A methylation in serum showed high degree of concordance with methylation in tissues (Kappa = 0.851, P < 0.001). RASSF1A hypermethylation in tissues and serum and its protein expression may be a valid, reliable and sensitive tool for detection and follow up of breast cancer patients.

BACKGROUND: Although obesity is associated with breast cancer incidence and prognosis, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Identification of obesity-associated epigenetic changes in breast tissue may advance mechanistic understanding of breast cancer initiation and progression. The goal of this study, therefore, was to investigate associations between obesity and gene methylation in breast tumors. METHODS: Using the Illumina GoldenGate Cancer I Panel, we estimated the association between body mass index (BMI) and gene methylation in 345 breast tumor samples from phase I of the Carolina Breast Cancer Study, a population-based case-control study. Multivariable linear regression was used to identify sites that were differentially methylated by BMI. Stratification by tumor estrogen receptor (ER) status was also conducted. RESULTS: In the majority of the 935 probes analyzed (87%), the average beta value increased with obesity (BMI >/= 30). Obesity was significantly associated with differential methylation (FDR q < 0.05) in just two gene loci in breast tumor tissue overall and in 21 loci among ER-positive tumors. Obesity was associated with methylation of genes that function in immune response, cell growth, and DNA repair. CONCLUSIONS: Obesity is associated with altered methylation overall, and with hypermethylation among ER-positive tumors in particular, suggesting that obesity may influence the methylation of genes with known relevance to cancer. Some of these differences in methylation by obese status may influence levels of gene expression within breast cells. IMPACT: If our results are validated, obesity-associated methylation sites could serve as targets for prevention and treatment research. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 24(3); 580-6. (c)2015 AACR.. BACKGROUND: Although obesity is associated with breast cancer incidence and prognosis, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Identification of obesity-associated epigenetic changes in breast tissue may advance mechanistic understanding of breast cancer initiation and progression. The goal of this study, therefore, was to investigate associations between obesity and gene methylation in breast tumors. METHODS: Using the Illumina GoldenGate Cancer I Panel, we estimated the association between body mass index (BMI) and gene methylation in 345 breast tumor samples from phase I of the Carolina Breast Cancer Study, a population-based case-control study. Multivariable linear regression was used to identify sites that were differentially methylated by BMI. Stratification by tumor estrogen receptor (ER) status was also conducted. RESULTS: In the majority of the 935 probes analyzed (87%), the average beta value increased with obesity (BMI >/= 30). Obesity was significantly associated with differential methylation (FDR q < 0.05) in just two gene loci in breast tumor tissue overall and in 21 loci among ER-positive tumors. Obesity was associated with methylation of genes that function in immune response, cell growth, and DNA repair. CONCLUSIONS: Obesity is associated with altered methylation overall, and with hypermethylation among ER-positive tumors in particular, suggesting that obesity may influence the methylation of genes with known relevance to cancer. Some of these differences in methylation by obese status may influence levels of gene expression within breast cells. IMPACT: If our results are validated, obesity-associated methylation sites could serve as targets for prevention and treatment research. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 24(3); 580-6. (c)2015 AACR.

Gene expression studies indicate that body mass index (BMI) is associated with molecular pathways involved in inflammation, insulin-like growth factor activation, and other carcinogenic processes in breast tissue. The goal of this study was to determine whether BMI is associated with gene methylation in breast tissue and to identify pathways that are commonly methylated in association with high BMI. Epigenome-wide methylation profiles were determined using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array in the non-diseased breast tissue of 81 women undergoing breast surgery between 2009 and 2013 at the University of North Carolina Hospitals. Multivariable, robust linear regression was performed to identify methylation sites associated with BMI at a false discovery rate q value <0.05. Gene expression microarray data was used to identify which of the BMI-associated methylation sites also showed correlation with gene expression. Gene set enrichment analysis was conducted to assess which pathways were enriched among the BMI-associated methylation sites. Of the 431,568 methylation sites analyzed, 2573 were associated with BMI (q value <0.05), 57 % of which showed an inverse correlation with BMI. Pathways enriched among the 2573 probe sites included those involved in inflammation, insulin receptor signaling, and leptin signaling. We were able to map 1251 of the BMI-associated methylation sites to gene expression data, and, of these, 226 (18 %) showed substantial correlations with gene expression. Our results suggest that BMI is associated with genome-wide methylation in non-diseased breast tissue and may influence epigenetic pathways involved in inflammatory and other carcinogenic processes.. Gene expression studies indicate that body mass index (BMI) is associated with molecular pathways involved in inflammation, insulin-like growth factor activation, and other carcinogenic processes in breast tissue. The goal of this study was to determine whether BMI is associated with gene methylation in breast tissue and to identify pathways that are commonly methylated in association with high BMI. Epigenome-wide methylation profiles were determined using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array in the non-diseased breast tissue of 81 women undergoing breast surgery between 2009 and 2013 at the University of North Carolina Hospitals. Multivariable, robust linear regression was performed to identify methylation sites associated with BMI at a false discovery rate q value <0.05. Gene expression microarray data was used to identify which of the BMI-associated methylation sites also showed correlation with gene expression. Gene set enrichment analysis was conducted to assess which pathways were enriched among the BMI-associated methylation sites. Of the 431,568 methylation sites analyzed, 2573 were associated with BMI (q value <0.05), 57 % of which showed an inverse correlation with BMI. Pathways enriched among the 2573 probe sites included those involved in inflammation, insulin receptor signaling, and leptin signaling. We were able to map 1251 of the BMI-associated methylation sites to gene expression data, and, of these, 226 (18 %) showed substantial correlations with gene expression. Our results suggest that BMI is associated with genome-wide methylation in non-diseased breast tissue and may influence epigenetic pathways involved in inflammatory and other carcinogenic processes.

OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies in women worldwide. It is caused by a number of genetic and epigenetic factors. Aberrant hypermethylation of the promoter regions in specific genes is a key event in the formation and progression of breast cancers as well as the DBC2 gene, as a tumor suppressor gene. Different studies show that the DBC2 gene is inactivated through epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation in its promoter region. In this study, authors have tried to analyze methylation status in the promoter region of DBC2 gene in affected women and healthy controls. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, we evaluated the methylation status of DBC2 gene with nested methylation-specific PCR (MSPCR) using specific methylated and unmethylated primer sets, in three separate PCR reactions. We used 50 tissue and blood samples of patients with breast cancer, 5 normal tissues and also 30 normal blood samples. Results were evaluated by the Mann-Whitney test, SPSS 16.0 statistical software. RESULTS: Nested MSPCR results demonstrated that the frequency of the DBC2 promoter region methylation status in tumor and blood samples of the affected patients was significantly higher than that of the corresponding normal controls. CONCLUSION: DBC2 gene inactivation by methylation of CpG islands in the promoter region probably is a crucial step in the process of cell proliferation and susceptibility to different cancers, including breast cancer. Our study provides new evidence that aberrant methylation of the DBC2 gene is involved in the tumorigenesis of breast cancer. DNA methylation in this gene is proven to be a potential marker for tumor diagnosis and prognosis, as well as a novel therapeutic target.. OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is one of the most common malignancies in women worldwide. It is caused by a number of genetic and epigenetic factors. Aberrant hypermethylation of the promoter regions in specific genes is a key event in the formation and progression of breast cancers as well as the DBC2 gene, as a tumor suppressor gene. Different studies show that the DBC2 gene is inactivated through epigenetic mechanisms such as methylation in its promoter region. In this study, authors have tried to analyze methylation status in the promoter region of DBC2 gene in affected women and healthy controls. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, we evaluated the methylation status of DBC2 gene with nested methylation-specific PCR (MSPCR) using specific methylated and unmethylated primer sets, in three separate PCR reactions. We used 50 tissue and blood samples of patients with breast cancer, 5 normal tissues and also 30 normal blood samples. Results were evaluated by the Mann-Whitney test, SPSS 16.0 statistical software. RESULTS: Nested MSPCR results demonstrated that the frequency of the DBC2 promoter region methylation status in tumor and blood samples of the affected patients was significantly higher than that of the corresponding normal controls. CONCLUSION: DBC2 gene inactivation by methylation of CpG islands in the promoter region probably is a crucial step in the process of cell proliferation and susceptibility to different cancers, including breast cancer. Our study provides new evidence that aberrant methylation of the DBC2 gene is involved in the tumorigenesis of breast cancer. DNA methylation in this gene is proven to be a potential marker for tumor diagnosis and prognosis, as well as a novel therapeutic target.

Radiotherapy (RT) is a central treatment modality for breast cancer patients. The purpose of our study was to investigate the DNA methylation changes in tumors following RT, and to identify epigenetic markers predicting treatment outcome. Paired biopsies from patients with inoperable breast cancer were collected both before irradiation (n = 20) and after receiving 10-24 Gray (Gy) (n = 19). DNA methylation analysis was performed by using Illumina Infinium 27K arrays. Fourteen genes were selected for technical validation by pyrosequencing. Eighty-two differentially methylated genes were identified in irradiated (n = 11) versus nonirradiated (n = 19) samples (false discovery rate, FDR = 1.1%). Methylation levels in pathways belonging to the immune system were most altered after RT. Based on methylation levels before irradiation, a panel of five genes (H2AFY, CTSA, LTC4S, IL5RA and RB1) were significantly associated with clinical response (p = 0.041). Furthermore, the degree of methylation changes for 2,516 probes correlated with the given radiation dose. Within the 2,516 probes, an enrichment for pathways involved in cellular immune response, proliferation and apoptosis was identified (FDR < 5%). Here, we observed clear differences in methylation levels induced by radiation, some associated with response to treatment. Our study adds knowledge on the molecular mechanisms behind radiation response.. Radiotherapy (RT) is a central treatment modality for breast cancer patients. The purpose of our study was to investigate the DNA methylation changes in tumors following RT, and to identify epigenetic markers predicting treatment outcome. Paired biopsies from patients with inoperable breast cancer were collected both before irradiation (n = 20) and after receiving 10-24 Gray (Gy) (n = 19). DNA methylation analysis was performed by using Illumina Infinium 27K arrays. Fourteen genes were selected for technical validation by pyrosequencing. Eighty-two differentially methylated genes were identified in irradiated (n = 11) versus nonirradiated (n = 19) samples (false discovery rate, FDR = 1.1%). Methylation levels in pathways belonging to the immune system were most altered after RT. Based on methylation levels before irradiation, a panel of five genes (H2AFY, CTSA, LTC4S, IL5RA and RB1) were significantly associated with clinical response (p = 0.041). Furthermore, the degree of methylation changes for 2,516 probes correlated with the given radiation dose. Within the 2,516 probes, an enrichment for pathways involved in cellular immune response, proliferation and apoptosis was identified (FDR < 5%). Here, we observed clear differences in methylation levels induced by radiation, some associated with response to treatment. Our study adds knowledge on the molecular mechanisms behind radiation response.

Ginsenoside Rg3 is a key metabolite of ginseng and is known to inhibit cancer cell growth. However, the epigenetics of CpG methylation and its regulatory mechanism have yet to be determined. Genome-wide methylation analysis of MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with Rg3 was performed to identify epigenetically regulated genes and pathways. The effect of Rg3 on apoptosis and cell proliferation was examined by a colony formation assay and a dye-based cell proliferation assay. The association between methylation and gene expression was monitored by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. Genome-wide methylation analysis identified the "cell morphology"-related pathway as the top network. Rg3 induced late stage apoptosis but inhibited cell proliferation up to 60%. Hypermethylated TRMT1L, PSMC6 and NOX4 were downregulated by Rg3, while hypomethylated ST3GAL4, RNLS and KDM5A were upregulated. In accordance, downregulation of NOX4 by siRNA abrogated the cell growth effect of Rg3, while the effect was opposite for KDM5A. Notably, breast cancer patients with a higher expression of NOX4 and KDM5A showed poor and good prognosis of survival, respectively. In conclusion, Rg3 deregulated tumor-related genes through alteration of the epigenetic methylation level leading to growth inhibition of cancer cells.. Ginsenoside Rg3 is a key metabolite of ginseng and is known to inhibit cancer cell growth. However, the epigenetics of CpG methylation and its regulatory mechanism have yet to be determined. Genome-wide methylation analysis of MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with Rg3 was performed to identify epigenetically regulated genes and pathways. The effect of Rg3 on apoptosis and cell proliferation was examined by a colony formation assay and a dye-based cell proliferation assay. The association between methylation and gene expression was monitored by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis. Genome-wide methylation analysis identified the "cell morphology"-related pathway as the top network. Rg3 induced late stage apoptosis but inhibited cell proliferation up to 60%. Hypermethylated TRMT1L, PSMC6 and NOX4 were downregulated by Rg3, while hypomethylated ST3GAL4, RNLS and KDM5A were upregulated. In accordance, downregulation of NOX4 by siRNA abrogated the cell growth effect of Rg3, while the effect was opposite for KDM5A. Notably, breast cancer patients with a higher expression of NOX4 and KDM5A showed poor and good prognosis of survival, respectively. In conclusion, Rg3 deregulated tumor-related genes through alteration of the epigenetic methylation level leading to growth inhibition of cancer cells.

The levels of DNA methylation and their role in gene expression are key factors that could affect diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment options of different diseases. In this study, the methylation levels of 22 genes that are mostly correlated to breast cancer were determined using EpiTect methyl II PCR array. This analysis was performed to determine the effect of cells' passage number and the use of antibiotics in the culturing media on gene methylation levels in MCF7 cell line. DNA methylation levels of PTGS2, ADAM23, HIC1, and PYCARD were found to be significantly different among different passages. While the DNA methylation levels of CCNA1, RASSF1, and THBS1 were found to be affected by the use of 1% of penicillin/streptomycin in the culture media. Gene expression analysis after demethylation using 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine showed that the gene expression levels of the hypermethylated genes varied between different passage numbers. This study shows that the presence of antibiotic within cultured media and cell line's passage number could greatly affect the methylation levels that need to be considered in future studies on cell lines.. The levels of DNA methylation and their role in gene expression are key factors that could affect diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment options of different diseases. In this study, the methylation levels of 22 genes that are mostly correlated to breast cancer were determined using EpiTect methyl II PCR array. This analysis was performed to determine the effect of cells' passage number and the use of antibiotics in the culturing media on gene methylation levels in MCF7 cell line. DNA methylation levels of PTGS2, ADAM23, HIC1, and PYCARD were found to be significantly different among different passages. While the DNA methylation levels of CCNA1, RASSF1, and THBS1 were found to be affected by the use of 1% of penicillin/streptomycin in the culture media. Gene expression analysis after demethylation using 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine showed that the gene expression levels of the hypermethylated genes varied between different passage numbers. This study shows that the presence of antibiotic within cultured media and cell line's passage number could greatly affect the methylation levels that need to be considered in future studies on cell lines.

Loss of DBC2 (deleted in breast cancer 2) gene expression is frequent in breast cancer tissues. This can be explained by homozygous deletions or other mutations in a minority of cases but alternative mechanisms need to be investigated. Here, DBC2 expression was significantly suppressed compared with normal breast tissues in breast cancer tissues when analyzed by RT-PCR. Furthermore, DNA methylation on DBC2 was more prevalent in breast tumors than in normal tissues. DBC2 mRNA levels correlated with the degree of DBC2 methylation in breast cancer tissues and in a breast cancer cell line (T47D). Clinico-pathological correlation analysis showed that DBC2 promoter methylation was associated with tumor-node-metastasis stages II and III/IV, lymph node metastasis, p53 mutation, and HER2-positive status. Thus loss of DBC2 expression is caused by abnormal methylation of DBC2 and might have a role in breast cancer development.. Loss of DBC2 (deleted in breast cancer 2) gene expression is frequent in breast cancer tissues. This can be explained by homozygous deletions or other mutations in a minority of cases but alternative mechanisms need to be investigated. Here, DBC2 expression was significantly suppressed compared with normal breast tissues in breast cancer tissues when analyzed by RT-PCR. Furthermore, DNA methylation on DBC2 was more prevalent in breast tumors than in normal tissues. DBC2 mRNA levels correlated with the degree of DBC2 methylation in breast cancer tissues and in a breast cancer cell line (T47D). Clinico-pathological correlation analysis showed that DBC2 promoter methylation was associated with tumor-node-metastasis stages II and III/IV, lymph node metastasis, p53 mutation, and HER2-positive status. Thus loss of DBC2 expression is caused by abnormal methylation of DBC2 and might have a role in breast cancer development.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cell differentiation is an important characteristic of malignant tumor and has a great impact on prognosis and therapeutic decision for patients. The N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), a putative tumor suppression gene, is involved in the regulation of human cell differentiation and metastasis in various cancers. Changes in the status of methylation of the NDRG1 gene have not been studied in detail in human breast cancer. RESULTS: The MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cell line could express NDRG1. However, it was only expressed after treatment with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) in T47D cell line, which revealed that NDRG1 expression could modulated by DNA methylation. Therefore, the fragment surrounding the transcript start site of NDRG1 gene promoter was cloned after sodium bisulfite DNA treatment. A high density (66%) of methylation for human NDRG1 gene promoter was detected in T47D; however, there was only 16% of methylated CpG dinucleotides in the NDRG1 gene promoter in MDA-MB-231. DNA methylation in the NDRG1 promoter was detected in 31.1% of primary breast cancer samples. Furthermore, the NDRG1 promoter methylation correlated with the Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) at stage III/IV, metastasis, lymph invasion, moderate and poor histological grade in the breast cancer patients. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the DNA methylation status of NDRG1 gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis and/or development of breast cancer, and the expression could be regulated by aberrant DNA methylation.. BACKGROUND: Cancer cell differentiation is an important characteristic of malignant tumor and has a great impact on prognosis and therapeutic decision for patients. The N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1), a putative tumor suppression gene, is involved in the regulation of human cell differentiation and metastasis in various cancers. Changes in the status of methylation of the NDRG1 gene have not been studied in detail in human breast cancer. RESULTS: The MDA-MB-231 breast tumor cell line could express NDRG1. However, it was only expressed after treatment with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) in T47D cell line, which revealed that NDRG1 expression could modulated by DNA methylation. Therefore, the fragment surrounding the transcript start site of NDRG1 gene promoter was cloned after sodium bisulfite DNA treatment. A high density (66%) of methylation for human NDRG1 gene promoter was detected in T47D; however, there was only 16% of methylated CpG dinucleotides in the NDRG1 gene promoter in MDA-MB-231. DNA methylation in the NDRG1 promoter was detected in 31.1% of primary breast cancer samples. Furthermore, the NDRG1 promoter methylation correlated with the Tumor Node Metastasis (TNM) at stage III/IV, metastasis, lymph invasion, moderate and poor histological grade in the breast cancer patients. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the DNA methylation status of NDRG1 gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis and/or development of breast cancer, and the expression could be regulated by aberrant DNA methylation.

This study assessed the clinical efficacy of the neoadjuvant chemotherapy TAC scheme in treatment of patients with locally advanced breast cancer, and the value of the level of Ras association domain family 1A (RASSF1A) gene methylation and the Wnt inhibitory factor (WIF)-1 gene in tissue and serum of patients in clinical outcome prediction. In total, 126 patients were consecutively selected to receive TAC scheme (docetaxel, pirarubicin/epirubicin and cyclophosphamide) for at least four cycles with the total effective rate. The incidence of complications, progression-free survival and survival rate were recorded. Tumor tissues and peripheral blood samples collected in this study was used to detect methylation positive rate of RASSF1A and WIF-1 by methylation-specific PCR method and the relative level of expression of RASSF1A and WIF-1 mRNA by reverse transcription PCR method. Of the 126 patients, there were 18 cases with complete response (CR), 32 cases with partial response (PR), 50 cases with stable disease (SD), and 26 cases with disease progression (PD) with a total effective rate of 79.37%. Comparison on baseline data of effective group and ineffective group showed no difference (P>0.05), and comparison on adverse reactions occurrence showed no difference (P>0.05). Progression-free survival of the effective group was prolonged with a significant increase in survival rate (P<0.05). Positive rates of RASSF1A methylation and WIF-1 in tissue and serum of the patients in the effective group were significantly lower than those in the ineffective group, but the mRNA of RASSF1A and WIF-mRNA was significantly higher than the ineffective group (P<0.05). The sensitivity of clinical outcome prediction using tissue RASSF1A methylation was 67.0%, the specificity 15.4%, positive predictive value 69.0% and negative predictive value 31.0%. The above-mentioned indexes of tissue WIF-1 were 76.0, 31.4, 72.2 and 27.8, respectively. The indexes of serum RASSF1A were 85.0, 50.0, 76.2 and 23.8%, respectively, and the indexes of serum WIF-1 were 94.0, 75.0, 81.0 and 19.0%, respectively. The receiver operating characteristic curve analysis suggested that the accuracy of clinical outcome prediction using tissue RASSF1A mRNA level was 0.812. The sensitivity 85.2%, the specificity 76.3% and the critical value 0.4256. These indexes of tissue WIF-1 were 0.833, 86.7%, 75.4% and 0.3562 for CR, PR, SD and PD, respectively. These indexes of serum RASSF1A were 0.864, 88.3%, 77.4% and 0.2564, respectively, and for serum WIF-1 were 0.882, 89.4%, 73.5% and 0.1562, respectively. In conclusion, the detection of RASSF1A and WIF-1 gene methylation and level of mRNA expression in tissue and serum of patients with locally advanced breast cancer has an important application value in predicting clinical efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy of the TAC scheme.. This study assessed the clinical efficacy of the neoadjuvant chemotherapy TAC scheme in treatment of patients with locally advanced breast cancer, and the value of the level of Ras association domain family 1A (RASSF1A) gene methylation and the Wnt inhibitory factor (WIF)-1 gene in tissue and serum of patients in clinical outcome prediction. In total, 126 patients were consecutively selected to receive TAC scheme (docetaxel, pirarubicin/epirubicin and cyclophosphamide) for at least four cycles with the total effective rate. The incidence of complications, progression-free survival and survival rate were recorded. Tumor tissues and peripheral blood samples collected in this study was used to detect methylation positive rate of RASSF1A and WIF-1 by methylation-specific PCR method and the relative level of expression of RASSF1A and WIF-1 mRNA by reverse transcription PCR method. Of the 126 patients, there were 18 cases with complete response (CR), 32 cases with partial response (PR), 50 cases with stable disease (SD), and 26 cases with disease progression (PD) with a total effective rate of 79.37%. Comparison on baseline data of effective group and ineffective group showed no difference (P>0.05), and comparison on adverse reactions occurrence showed no difference (P>0.05). Progression-free survival of the effective group was prolonged with a significant increase in survival rate (P<0.05). Positive rates of RASSF1A methylation and WIF-1 in tissue and serum of the patients in the effective group were significantly lower than those in the ineffective group, but the mRNA of RASSF1A and WIF-mRNA was significantly higher than the ineffective group (P<0.05). The sensitivity of clinical outcome prediction using tissue RASSF1A methylation was 67.0%, the specificity 15.4%, positive predictive value 69.0% and negative predictive value 31.0%. The above-mentioned indexes of tissue WIF-1 were 76.0, 31.4, 72.2 and 27.8, respectively. The indexes of serum RASSF1A were 85.0, 50.0, 76.2 and 23.8%, respectively, and the indexes of serum WIF-1 were 94.0, 75.0, 81.0 and 19.0%, respectively. The receiver operating characteristic curve analysis suggested that the accuracy of clinical outcome prediction using tissue RASSF1A mRNA level was 0.812. The sensitivity 85.2%, the specificity 76.3% and the critical value 0.4256. These indexes of tissue WIF-1 were 0.833, 86.7%, 75.4% and 0.3562 for CR, PR, SD and PD, respectively. These indexes of serum RASSF1A were 0.864, 88.3%, 77.4% and 0.2564, respectively, and for serum WIF-1 were 0.882, 89.4%, 73.5% and 0.1562, respectively. In conclusion, the detection of RASSF1A and WIF-1 gene methylation and level of mRNA expression in tissue and serum of patients with locally advanced breast cancer has an important application value in predicting clinical efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy of the TAC scheme.

Genetic defects in breast cancer (BC) susceptibility genes, most importantly BRCA1 and BRCA2, account for ~40% of hereditary BC and ovarian cancer (OC). Little is known about the contribution of constitutive (soma-wide) epimutations to the remaining cases. We developed bisulfite pyrosequencing assays to screen >600 affected BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation-negative patients from the German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer for constitutive hypermethylation of ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C, PTEN and TP53 in blood cells. In a second step, patients with >/=6% promoter methylation were analyzed by bisulfite plasmid sequencing to demonstrate the presence of hypermethylated alleles (epimutations), indicative of epigenetic gene silencing. Altogether we identified nine (1.4%) patients with constitutive BRCA1 and three (0.5%) with RAD51C hypermethylation. Epimutations were found in both sporadic cases, in particular in 2 (5.5%) of 37 patients with early-onset BC, and familial cases, in particular 4 (10%) of 39 patients with OC. Hypermethylation was always confined to one of the two parental alleles in a subset (12-40%) of the analyzed cells. Because epimutations occurred in cell types from different embryonal layers, they most likely originated in single cells during early somatic development. We propose that analogous to germline genetic mutations constitutive epimutations may serve as the first hit of tumor development. Because the role of constitutive epimutations in cancer development is likely to be largely underestimated, future strategies for effective testing of susceptibility to BC and OC should include an epimutation screen.. Genetic defects in breast cancer (BC) susceptibility genes, most importantly BRCA1 and BRCA2, account for ~40% of hereditary BC and ovarian cancer (OC). Little is known about the contribution of constitutive (soma-wide) epimutations to the remaining cases. We developed bisulfite pyrosequencing assays to screen >600 affected BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation-negative patients from the German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer for constitutive hypermethylation of ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C, PTEN and TP53 in blood cells. In a second step, patients with >/=6% promoter methylation were analyzed by bisulfite plasmid sequencing to demonstrate the presence of hypermethylated alleles (epimutations), indicative of epigenetic gene silencing. Altogether we identified nine (1.4%) patients with constitutive BRCA1 and three (0.5%) with RAD51C hypermethylation. Epimutations were found in both sporadic cases, in particular in 2 (5.5%) of 37 patients with early-onset BC, and familial cases, in particular 4 (10%) of 39 patients with OC. Hypermethylation was always confined to one of the two parental alleles in a subset (12-40%) of the analyzed cells. Because epimutations occurred in cell types from different embryonal layers, they most likely originated in single cells during early somatic development. We propose that analogous to germline genetic mutations constitutive epimutations may serve as the first hit of tumor development. Because the role of constitutive epimutations in cancer development is likely to be largely underestimated, future strategies for effective testing of susceptibility to BC and OC should include an epimutation screen.

BACKGROUND: Even after early detection and curative resection of early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), a significant fraction of patients develop recurrent disease. Molecular biomarkers that can predict the risk of recurrence thus need to be identified to improve clinical outcomes. METHODS: Using the methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction assay, promoter methylation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) was assessed in cancer tissues from 70 patients with curatively resected stage I NSCLC. The clinical relevance of BRCA1 methylation status was evaluated in terms of outcome of the disease. RESULTS: Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in 13 of 70 patients (18.6%). Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that BRCA1 methylation was an independent risk factor for recurrence (P = .0197) and that patients with BRCA1 methylation demonstrated significantly poorer recurrence-free survival compared to those without (P = .0139). Cox's proportional hazard regression analysis revealed that BRCA1 methylation was an independent risk factor for recurrence-free survival (P = .0155). CONCLUSIONS: Methylated BRCA1 can be a potential biomarker that predicts the prognosis after curative resection of stage I NSCLC. Considering that BRCA1 plays a role in chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, it is plausible that identification of methylated BRCA1 could provide information that is clinically relevant to tailored adjuvant therapy.. BACKGROUND: Even after early detection and curative resection of early stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), a significant fraction of patients develop recurrent disease. Molecular biomarkers that can predict the risk of recurrence thus need to be identified to improve clinical outcomes. METHODS: Using the methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction assay, promoter methylation of the breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) was assessed in cancer tissues from 70 patients with curatively resected stage I NSCLC. The clinical relevance of BRCA1 methylation status was evaluated in terms of outcome of the disease. RESULTS: Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in 13 of 70 patients (18.6%). Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that BRCA1 methylation was an independent risk factor for recurrence (P = .0197) and that patients with BRCA1 methylation demonstrated significantly poorer recurrence-free survival compared to those without (P = .0139). Cox's proportional hazard regression analysis revealed that BRCA1 methylation was an independent risk factor for recurrence-free survival (P = .0155). CONCLUSIONS: Methylated BRCA1 can be a potential biomarker that predicts the prognosis after curative resection of stage I NSCLC. Considering that BRCA1 plays a role in chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, it is plausible that identification of methylated BRCA1 could provide information that is clinically relevant to tailored adjuvant therapy.

Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate the BRCA1 promoter methylation and clinicopathological characteristics in sporadic breast cancer patients in Indonesia. Methods: In this cohort study, we selected 90 patients with stage I-III who had definitive surgery at our institution in 2011-2014. Demographic and clinical data regarding pathological stage, breast cancer treatment, outcome etc. were collected from the medical records. Twelve patients had incomplete information on follow up and 18 samples had insufficient tissues for the experiment. Sixty patients with adequate cancer tissues and complete follow up record were analyzed, only 56 patients were analyzed because 4 samples mRNA expression could not be detected. The Mann-Whitney U tests for non-normally distributed groups were used to compare the levels expression of BRCA1 mRNA between methylated and non-methylated samples. Chi-square tests were used to compare methylation status, BRCA1 mRNA expression and clinicopathological characteristics. P value < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant correlation. Data analysis was held by using the GraphPad PRISM 7 (GraphPad Software Inc., USA). Results: DNA and RNA were isolated from primary tumor tissues of 56 breast cancer patients. BRCA1 promoter methylation was detected in 48 of 56 patients (85%). Level of BRCA1 mRNA expression was associated with decreased methylation level in the BRCA1 promoter regions suggesting the role of epigenetic silencing. However, there was no statistically significant association among methylation levels, BRCA1 mRNA transcript level with clinicopathological factors. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first study investigating methylation status and level of BRCA1 mRNA transcripts among breast cancer patients in Indonesia. We found that the prevalence of BRCA1 promoter methylation is higher than other studies from different populations. However, further investigation involving larger number of patients is required.. Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate the BRCA1 promoter methylation and clinicopathological characteristics in sporadic breast cancer patients in Indonesia. Methods: In this cohort study, we selected 90 patients with stage I-III who had definitive surgery at our institution in 2011-2014. Demographic and clinical data regarding pathological stage, breast cancer treatment, outcome etc. were collected from the medical records. Twelve patients had incomplete information on follow up and 18 samples had insufficient tissues for the experiment. Sixty patients with adequate cancer tissues and complete follow up record were analyzed, only 56 patients were analyzed because 4 samples mRNA expression could not be detected. The Mann-Whitney U tests for non-normally distributed groups were used to compare the levels expression of BRCA1 mRNA between methylated and non-methylated samples. Chi-square tests were used to compare methylation status, BRCA1 mRNA expression and clinicopathological characteristics. P value < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant correlation. Data analysis was held by using the GraphPad PRISM 7 (GraphPad Software Inc., USA). Results: DNA and RNA were isolated from primary tumor tissues of 56 breast cancer patients. BRCA1 promoter methylation was detected in 48 of 56 patients (85%). Level of BRCA1 mRNA expression was associated with decreased methylation level in the BRCA1 promoter regions suggesting the role of epigenetic silencing. However, there was no statistically significant association among methylation levels, BRCA1 mRNA transcript level with clinicopathological factors. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first study investigating methylation status and level of BRCA1 mRNA transcripts among breast cancer patients in Indonesia. We found that the prevalence of BRCA1 promoter methylation is higher than other studies from different populations. However, further investigation involving larger number of patients is required.

PURPOSE: We recently reported DNA methylation of the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene to be strongly correlated with increased risk of recurrence in node-negative, hormone receptor-positive, tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients using fresh frozen specimens. Aims of the present study were to establish determination of PITX2 methylation for routine analysis in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast cancer tissue and to test PITX2 DNA methylation as a biomarker for outcome prediction in an independent patient cohort. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology was validated for FFPE tissue by comparing methylation measurements in FFPE specimens with those in fresh frozen specimens from the same tumor. The impact of PITX2 methylation on time to distant metastasis was then evaluated in FFPE specimens from hormone receptor-positive, node-negative breast cancer patients (n = 399, adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy). RESULTS: Reproducibility of the PCR assay in replicate measurements (r(s) > or = 0.95; n = 150) and concordant measurements between fresh frozen and FFPE tissues (r(s) = 0.81; n = 89) were demonstrated. In a multivariate model, PITX2 methylation added significant information (hazard ratio = 2.35; 95% CI, 1.20 to 4.60) to established prognostic factors (tumor size, grade, and age). CONCLUSION: PITX2 methylation can be reliably assessed by real-time PCR technology in FFPE tissue. Together with our earlier studies, we have accumulated substantial evidence that PITX2 methylation analysis holds promise as a practical assay for routine clinical use to predict outcome in node-negative, tamoxifen-treated breast cancer, which might allow, based on future validation studies, the identification of low-risk patients who may be treated by tamoxifen alone.. PURPOSE: We recently reported DNA methylation of the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene to be strongly correlated with increased risk of recurrence in node-negative, hormone receptor-positive, tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients using fresh frozen specimens. Aims of the present study were to establish determination of PITX2 methylation for routine analysis in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast cancer tissue and to test PITX2 DNA methylation as a biomarker for outcome prediction in an independent patient cohort. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology was validated for FFPE tissue by comparing methylation measurements in FFPE specimens with those in fresh frozen specimens from the same tumor. The impact of PITX2 methylation on time to distant metastasis was then evaluated in FFPE specimens from hormone receptor-positive, node-negative breast cancer patients (n = 399, adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy). RESULTS: Reproducibility of the PCR assay in replicate measurements (r(s) > or = 0.95; n = 150) and concordant measurements between fresh frozen and FFPE tissues (r(s) = 0.81; n = 89) were demonstrated. In a multivariate model, PITX2 methylation added significant information (hazard ratio = 2.35; 95% CI, 1.20 to 4.60) to established prognostic factors (tumor size, grade, and age). CONCLUSION: PITX2 methylation can be reliably assessed by real-time PCR technology in FFPE tissue. Together with our earlier studies, we have accumulated substantial evidence that PITX2 methylation analysis holds promise as a practical assay for routine clinical use to predict outcome in node-negative, tamoxifen-treated breast cancer, which might allow, based on future validation studies, the identification of low-risk patients who may be treated by tamoxifen alone.

Hormone therapy (HT) is associated with increased risk of breast cancer, strongly dependent on type, duration, and recency of use. HT use could affect cancer risk by changing breast tissue transcriptional programs. We hypothesize that these changes are preceded by changes in DNA methylation. To explore this hypothesis we used histologically normal-appearing breast tissue from the Normal Breast Study (NBS). DNA methylation beta-values were obtained using the Illumina HumanMethylation 450 BeadChips for 90 samples including all NBS-participants who used HT within 5 y before surgery. Data were analyzed using the reference-free cell mixture method. Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) mRNA-Seq data were used to assess correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression. We identified 527 CpG sites in 403 genes that were associated with ever using HT at genome wide significance (FDR q < 0.05), of these, 68 sites were also significantly associated with duration of use or recency of use. Twelve sites reached significance in all analyses one of which was cg01382688 in ARHGEF4 (p < 1.2x10(-7)). Mutations in ARHGEF4 have been reported in breast tumors, but this is the first report of possible breast cancer-related DNA methylation changes. In addition, 22 genes included more than one significant CpG site and a majority of these sites were significantly correlated with gene expression. Although based on small numbers, these findings support the hypothesis that HT is associated with epigenetic alterations in breast tissue, and identifies genes with altered DNA methylation states which could be linked to breast cancer development.. Hormone therapy (HT) is associated with increased risk of breast cancer, strongly dependent on type, duration, and recency of use. HT use could affect cancer risk by changing breast tissue transcriptional programs. We hypothesize that these changes are preceded by changes in DNA methylation. To explore this hypothesis we used histologically normal-appearing breast tissue from the Normal Breast Study (NBS). DNA methylation beta-values were obtained using the Illumina HumanMethylation 450 BeadChips for 90 samples including all NBS-participants who used HT within 5 y before surgery. Data were analyzed using the reference-free cell mixture method. Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) mRNA-Seq data were used to assess correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression. We identified 527 CpG sites in 403 genes that were associated with ever using HT at genome wide significance (FDR q < 0.05), of these, 68 sites were also significantly associated with duration of use or recency of use. Twelve sites reached significance in all analyses one of which was cg01382688 in ARHGEF4 (p < 1.2x10(-7)). Mutations in ARHGEF4 have been reported in breast tumors, but this is the first report of possible breast cancer-related DNA methylation changes. In addition, 22 genes included more than one significant CpG site and a majority of these sites were significantly correlated with gene expression. Although based on small numbers, these findings support the hypothesis that HT is associated with epigenetic alterations in breast tissue, and identifies genes with altered DNA methylation states which could be linked to breast cancer development.

BACKGROUND: Altered DNA methylation of imprinted genes has been implicated in a range of cancers. Imprinting is established early in development, and some are maintained throughout the life course in multiple tissues, providing a plausible mechanism linking known early life factors to cancer risk. This study investigated methylation status of seven imprinted differentially methylated regions-PLAGL1/ZAC1, H19-ICR1, IGF2-DMR2, KvDMR-ICR2, RB1, SNRPN-DMR1 and PEG3-in blood samples from 189 women with the most common type of invasive breast cancer (invasive ductal carcinoma-IDC), 41 women with in situ breast cancer (ductal carcinoma in situ-DCIS) and 363 matched disease-free controls. RESULTS: There was no evidence that imprinted gene methylation levels varied with age (between 25 and 87 years old), weight or height. Higher PEG3 methylation was associated with an elevated risk of IDC (odds ratio (OR) 1.065; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.002, 1.132; p = 0.042) and DCIS (OR 1.139; 95 % CI 1.027, 1.263; p = 0.013). The effect was stronger when in situ and invasive breast cancer were combined (OR 1.079; 95 % CI 1.020, 1.142; p = 0.008). DCIS breast cancer risk increased with higher KvDMR-ICR2 methylation (OR 1.395; 95 % CI 1.190, 1.635; p < 0.001) and lower PLAGL1/ZAC1 methylation (OR 0.905; 95 % CI 0.833, 0.982; p = 0.017). In a combined model, only KvDMR-ICR2 methylation remained significantly associated. CONCLUSIONS: These findings may help to improve our understanding of the aetiology of breast cancer and the importance of early life factors in particular. Imprinting methylation status also has the potential to contribute to the development of improved screening and treatment strategies for women with, or at risk of, breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Altered DNA methylation of imprinted genes has been implicated in a range of cancers. Imprinting is established early in development, and some are maintained throughout the life course in multiple tissues, providing a plausible mechanism linking known early life factors to cancer risk. This study investigated methylation status of seven imprinted differentially methylated regions-PLAGL1/ZAC1, H19-ICR1, IGF2-DMR2, KvDMR-ICR2, RB1, SNRPN-DMR1 and PEG3-in blood samples from 189 women with the most common type of invasive breast cancer (invasive ductal carcinoma-IDC), 41 women with in situ breast cancer (ductal carcinoma in situ-DCIS) and 363 matched disease-free controls. RESULTS: There was no evidence that imprinted gene methylation levels varied with age (between 25 and 87 years old), weight or height. Higher PEG3 methylation was associated with an elevated risk of IDC (odds ratio (OR) 1.065; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.002, 1.132; p = 0.042) and DCIS (OR 1.139; 95 % CI 1.027, 1.263; p = 0.013). The effect was stronger when in situ and invasive breast cancer were combined (OR 1.079; 95 % CI 1.020, 1.142; p = 0.008). DCIS breast cancer risk increased with higher KvDMR-ICR2 methylation (OR 1.395; 95 % CI 1.190, 1.635; p < 0.001) and lower PLAGL1/ZAC1 methylation (OR 0.905; 95 % CI 0.833, 0.982; p = 0.017). In a combined model, only KvDMR-ICR2 methylation remained significantly associated. CONCLUSIONS: These findings may help to improve our understanding of the aetiology of breast cancer and the importance of early life factors in particular. Imprinting methylation status also has the potential to contribute to the development of improved screening and treatment strategies for women with, or at risk of, breast cancer.

PURPOSE: We have shown that DNA methylation of the PITX2 gene predicts risk of distant recurrence in steroid hormone receptor-positive, node-negative breast cancer. Here, we present results from a multicenter study investigating whether PITX2 and other candidate DNA methylation markers predict outcome in node-positive, estrogen receptor-positive, HER-2-negative breast cancer patients who received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using a microarray platform, we analyzed DNA methylation in regulatory regions of PITX2 and 60 additional candidate genes in 241 breast cancer specimens. Using Cox regression analysis, we assessed the predictive power of the individual marker/marker panel candidates. Clinical endpoints were time to distant metastasis, disease-free survival, and overall survival. A nested bootstrap/cross-validation strategy was applied to identify and validate marker panels. RESULTS: DNA methylation of PITX2 and 14 other genes was correlated with clinical outcome. In multivariate models, each methylation marker added significant information to established clinical factors. A four-marker panel including PITX2, BMP4, FGF4, and C20orf55 was identified that resulted in improvement of outcome prediction compared with PITX2 alone. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence for the PITX2 biomarker, which has now been successfully confirmed to predict outcome among different breast cancer patient populations. We further identify new DNA methylation biomarkers, three of which can be combined into a panel with PITX2 to increase the outcome prediction performance in our anthracycline-treated primary breast cancer population. Our results show that a well-defined panel of DNA methylation markers enables outcome prediction in lymph node-positive, HER-2-negative breast cancer patients treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy.. PURPOSE: We have shown that DNA methylation of the PITX2 gene predicts risk of distant recurrence in steroid hormone receptor-positive, node-negative breast cancer. Here, we present results from a multicenter study investigating whether PITX2 and other candidate DNA methylation markers predict outcome in node-positive, estrogen receptor-positive, HER-2-negative breast cancer patients who received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using a microarray platform, we analyzed DNA methylation in regulatory regions of PITX2 and 60 additional candidate genes in 241 breast cancer specimens. Using Cox regression analysis, we assessed the predictive power of the individual marker/marker panel candidates. Clinical endpoints were time to distant metastasis, disease-free survival, and overall survival. A nested bootstrap/cross-validation strategy was applied to identify and validate marker panels. RESULTS: DNA methylation of PITX2 and 14 other genes was correlated with clinical outcome. In multivariate models, each methylation marker added significant information to established clinical factors. A four-marker panel including PITX2, BMP4, FGF4, and C20orf55 was identified that resulted in improvement of outcome prediction compared with PITX2 alone. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence for the PITX2 biomarker, which has now been successfully confirmed to predict outcome among different breast cancer patient populations. We further identify new DNA methylation biomarkers, three of which can be combined into a panel with PITX2 to increase the outcome prediction performance in our anthracycline-treated primary breast cancer population. Our results show that a well-defined panel of DNA methylation markers enables outcome prediction in lymph node-positive, HER-2-negative breast cancer patients treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

We hypothesize that elevation of Nm23-H1 expression in micrometastatic breast cancer cells may inhibit their metastatic colonization and further invasion, and induce differentiation, thus resulting in a clinical benefit. The current study investigated the possible contribution of DNA methylation to the regulation of Nm23-H1 expression, based on the observation that two CpG islands are present in its promoter. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR), a DNA methylation inhibitor, increased the Nm23-H1 expression of 5 of 11 human breast carcinoma cell lines in vitro, including 3 of 3 metastatically competent lines. Increased Nm23-H1 expression was accompanied by a reduction in motility in vitro, with minimal effect on proliferation. Both increased Nm23-H1 expression and decreased motility were observed using low (75 nM) concentrations of 5-Aza-CdR. Array analysis of MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells treated with 5-Aza-CdR confirmed the elevation of nm23-H1 mRNA, whereas relatively few other genes exhibited altered expression. Bisulfite sequencing of the two CpG islands in a panel of cell lines and in 20 infiltrating ductal carcinomas revealed that one island (-3090 bp to -3922 bp) exhibited infrequent differential methylation. The data indicate that DNA methylation inhibitors can directly or indirectly cause both elevation of Nm23-H1 expression and decreased function in one aspect of metastasis, motility.. We hypothesize that elevation of Nm23-H1 expression in micrometastatic breast cancer cells may inhibit their metastatic colonization and further invasion, and induce differentiation, thus resulting in a clinical benefit. The current study investigated the possible contribution of DNA methylation to the regulation of Nm23-H1 expression, based on the observation that two CpG islands are present in its promoter. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR), a DNA methylation inhibitor, increased the Nm23-H1 expression of 5 of 11 human breast carcinoma cell lines in vitro, including 3 of 3 metastatically competent lines. Increased Nm23-H1 expression was accompanied by a reduction in motility in vitro, with minimal effect on proliferation. Both increased Nm23-H1 expression and decreased motility were observed using low (75 nM) concentrations of 5-Aza-CdR. Array analysis of MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells treated with 5-Aza-CdR confirmed the elevation of nm23-H1 mRNA, whereas relatively few other genes exhibited altered expression. Bisulfite sequencing of the two CpG islands in a panel of cell lines and in 20 infiltrating ductal carcinomas revealed that one island (-3090 bp to -3922 bp) exhibited infrequent differential methylation. The data indicate that DNA methylation inhibitors can directly or indirectly cause both elevation of Nm23-H1 expression and decreased function in one aspect of metastasis, motility.

OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the main cause of cancer morbidity for women worldwide and is manifestation of abnormal genetic as well as epigenetic changes. Therefore, our aim was to study the association of BRCA1 promoter methylation with rs11655505 (c.-2265C/T) variants and gene expression in sporadic breast cancer. METHODS: Twenty-nine sporadic breast cancer tissues and 26 normal biopsies were used for this study. Genomic DNA and total RNA were extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue and SNP analysis performed. Methylation status of the BRCA1 promoter region was determined by methylation-specific PCR after sodium bisulfite modification of DNA. RESULTS: Among all clinical-pathological parameters only estrogen receptor -ve and +ve samples were significantly different for methylation status (P = 0.04). The genotypic (CC, CT and TT), allelic frequencies and methylation status had not been found to be significantly different from that of healthy controls (P = 0.67, 0.71 and 0.17, respectively). Similarly, methylated BRCA1 promoter was not found to be significantly different in different genotypes from unmethylated promoters between patients and controls. Interestingly, only heterozygous (CT) genotypes with low and normal expression of BRCA1 were significantly different for the differential expression of BRCA1 compared to controls (P = 0.004). However, in tumor samples decreased expression of gene is associated with methylated state of BRCA1 promoter [OR (95 % CI) = 25.09 (2.17-29.75); P = 0.01]. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that both single nucleotide variations rs11655505 (c.-2265C/T) and the methylation status of BRCA1 are not associated significantly with the occurrence of sporadic breast cancer in studied population. However, decreased expression of gene is associated with the CT genotypes and the disease. But, in case of tumor samples, an association of methylation of the promoter to the decreased expression of BRCA1 gene suggests the possible role of methylation in gene silencing.. OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is the most common cancer and the main cause of cancer morbidity for women worldwide and is manifestation of abnormal genetic as well as epigenetic changes. Therefore, our aim was to study the association of BRCA1 promoter methylation with rs11655505 (c.-2265C/T) variants and gene expression in sporadic breast cancer. METHODS: Twenty-nine sporadic breast cancer tissues and 26 normal biopsies were used for this study. Genomic DNA and total RNA were extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue and SNP analysis performed. Methylation status of the BRCA1 promoter region was determined by methylation-specific PCR after sodium bisulfite modification of DNA. RESULTS: Among all clinical-pathological parameters only estrogen receptor -ve and +ve samples were significantly different for methylation status (P = 0.04). The genotypic (CC, CT and TT), allelic frequencies and methylation status had not been found to be significantly different from that of healthy controls (P = 0.67, 0.71 and 0.17, respectively). Similarly, methylated BRCA1 promoter was not found to be significantly different in different genotypes from unmethylated promoters between patients and controls. Interestingly, only heterozygous (CT) genotypes with low and normal expression of BRCA1 were significantly different for the differential expression of BRCA1 compared to controls (P = 0.004). However, in tumor samples decreased expression of gene is associated with methylated state of BRCA1 promoter [OR (95 % CI) = 25.09 (2.17-29.75); P = 0.01]. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that both single nucleotide variations rs11655505 (c.-2265C/T) and the methylation status of BRCA1 are not associated significantly with the occurrence of sporadic breast cancer in studied population. However, decreased expression of gene is associated with the CT genotypes and the disease. But, in case of tumor samples, an association of methylation of the promoter to the decreased expression of BRCA1 gene suggests the possible role of methylation in gene silencing.

Cancer chemoresistance is regulated by complex genetic and epigenetic networks. In this study, the features of gene expression, methylation, and microRNA (miRNA) expression were investigated with high-throughput sequencing in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells resistant to adriamycin (MCF-7/ADM) and paclitaxel (MCF-7/PTX). We found that: 1 in circle both of the chemoresistant cell lines had similar, massive changes in gene expression, methylation, and miRNA expression versus chemosensitive controls. 2 in circle Pairwise integration of the data highlighted sets of genes that were regulated by either methylation or miRNAs, and sets of miRNAs whose expression was controlled by DNA methylation in chemoresistant cells. 3 in circle By combining the three sets of high-throughput data, we obtained a list of genes whose expression was regulated by both methylation and miRNAs in chemoresistant cells; 4 in circle Expression of these genes was then validated in clinical breast cancer samples to generate a 17-gene signature that showed good predictive and prognostic power in triple-negative breast cancer patients receiving anthracycline-taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In conclusion, our results have generated a new workflow for the integrated analysis of the effects of miRNAs and methylation on gene expression during the development of chemoresistance.. Cancer chemoresistance is regulated by complex genetic and epigenetic networks. In this study, the features of gene expression, methylation, and microRNA (miRNA) expression were investigated with high-throughput sequencing in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells resistant to adriamycin (MCF-7/ADM) and paclitaxel (MCF-7/PTX). We found that: 1 in circle both of the chemoresistant cell lines had similar, massive changes in gene expression, methylation, and miRNA expression versus chemosensitive controls. 2 in circle Pairwise integration of the data highlighted sets of genes that were regulated by either methylation or miRNAs, and sets of miRNAs whose expression was controlled by DNA methylation in chemoresistant cells. 3 in circle By combining the three sets of high-throughput data, we obtained a list of genes whose expression was regulated by both methylation and miRNAs in chemoresistant cells; 4 in circle Expression of these genes was then validated in clinical breast cancer samples to generate a 17-gene signature that showed good predictive and prognostic power in triple-negative breast cancer patients receiving anthracycline-taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In conclusion, our results have generated a new workflow for the integrated analysis of the effects of miRNAs and methylation on gene expression during the development of chemoresistance.

We previously demonstrated that the overexpression of transient receptor potential channel C5 (TRPC5) and nuclear factor of activated T-cells isoform c3 (NFATC3) are essential for cancer chemoresistance, but how TRPC5 and NFATC3 are regulated was still unclear. In this study, microRNA 320a (miR-320a) was found to be down-regulated in chemoresistant cancer cells. MiR-320a directly targeted TRPC5 and NFATC3, and down-regulation of miR-320a triggered TRPC5 and NFATC3 overexpression. In chemoresistant cells, down-regulation of miR-320a was associated with regulation by methylation, which implicated promoter methylation of the miR-320a coding sequence. Furthermore, the transcription factor v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS-1), which inhibited miR-320a expression, was activated in chemoresistant cancer cells; such activation was associated with hypomethylation of the ETS-1 promoter. Lastly, the down-regulation of miR-320a and high expression of TRPC5, NFATC3, and ETS-1 were verified in clinically chemoresistant samples. Low expression of MiR-320a was also found to be a significant unfavorable predictor for clinic outcome. In conclusion, miR-320a is a mediator of chemoresistance by targeting TRPC5 and NFATC3. Expression of miR-320a is regulated by methylation of its promoter and that of ETS-1.. We previously demonstrated that the overexpression of transient receptor potential channel C5 (TRPC5) and nuclear factor of activated T-cells isoform c3 (NFATC3) are essential for cancer chemoresistance, but how TRPC5 and NFATC3 are regulated was still unclear. In this study, microRNA 320a (miR-320a) was found to be down-regulated in chemoresistant cancer cells. MiR-320a directly targeted TRPC5 and NFATC3, and down-regulation of miR-320a triggered TRPC5 and NFATC3 overexpression. In chemoresistant cells, down-regulation of miR-320a was associated with regulation by methylation, which implicated promoter methylation of the miR-320a coding sequence. Furthermore, the transcription factor v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS-1), which inhibited miR-320a expression, was activated in chemoresistant cancer cells; such activation was associated with hypomethylation of the ETS-1 promoter. Lastly, the down-regulation of miR-320a and high expression of TRPC5, NFATC3, and ETS-1 were verified in clinically chemoresistant samples. Low expression of MiR-320a was also found to be a significant unfavorable predictor for clinic outcome. In conclusion, miR-320a is a mediator of chemoresistance by targeting TRPC5 and NFATC3. Expression of miR-320a is regulated by methylation of its promoter and that of ETS-1.

Dysregulation of microRNA is strongly implicated in the chemoresistance of cancer. In this study, we found that miR-149 was downregulated and involved in chemoresistance in adriamycin (ADM)-resistant human breast cancer cells (MCF-7/ADM). Downregulation of miR-149 was related to hypermethylation of its 5'-UTR; this methylation also affected the expression of the glypican 1 gene, which is both the host and the target gene of miR-149. Furthermore, we found that miR-149 modulated chemoresistance through targeting the expression of GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 (NDST1). With downregulated miR-149, NDST1 expression was increased in chemoresistant MCF-7/ADM cells versus control MCF-7 wild-type cells. The increased NDST1 then activated a heparan sulfate-related pathway involving activation of heparanase. Finally, expression of miR-149 and NDST1 was confirmed in clinical chemoresistant samples of breast cancers receiving anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapies. The high expression of NDST1 was also an unfavorable predictor for distant relapse-free survival in Her2 and basal breast cancers. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that miR-149 is regulated by methylation, and is a modulator of cancer chemoresistance by targeting NDST1.. Dysregulation of microRNA is strongly implicated in the chemoresistance of cancer. In this study, we found that miR-149 was downregulated and involved in chemoresistance in adriamycin (ADM)-resistant human breast cancer cells (MCF-7/ADM). Downregulation of miR-149 was related to hypermethylation of its 5'-UTR; this methylation also affected the expression of the glypican 1 gene, which is both the host and the target gene of miR-149. Furthermore, we found that miR-149 modulated chemoresistance through targeting the expression of GlcNAc N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 (NDST1). With downregulated miR-149, NDST1 expression was increased in chemoresistant MCF-7/ADM cells versus control MCF-7 wild-type cells. The increased NDST1 then activated a heparan sulfate-related pathway involving activation of heparanase. Finally, expression of miR-149 and NDST1 was confirmed in clinical chemoresistant samples of breast cancers receiving anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapies. The high expression of NDST1 was also an unfavorable predictor for distant relapse-free survival in Her2 and basal breast cancers. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that miR-149 is regulated by methylation, and is a modulator of cancer chemoresistance by targeting NDST1.

Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is an important tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer. However, there were inconsistent conclusions in the association between APC promoter methylation and breast cancer. Hence, we conducted a meta-analysis to quantitatively assess the clinicopathological significance and diagnosis role of APC methylation in breast cancer. In total, 3172 samples from 29 studies were performed in this study. The odds ratio (OR) of APC methylation was 5.92 (95% CI = 3.16-11.07) in breast cancer cases compared to controls,. The APC promoter methylation was associated with cancer stage (OR = 0.47, 95% CI = 0.28-0.80, P = 0.006), lymph node metastases (OR = 0.55, 95% CI = 0.36-0.84, P = 0.005) and ER status (OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 1.03-1.73, P = 0.003) in breast cancer. Furthermore, the sensitivity and specificity for all included studies were 0.444 (95% CI: 0.321-0.575, P < 0.0001) and 0.976 (95% CI: 0.916-0.993, P < 0.0001), respectively. These results suggested that APC promoter methylation was associated with breast cancer risk, and it could be a valuable biomarker for diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of breast cancer.. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is an important tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer. However, there were inconsistent conclusions in the association between APC promoter methylation and breast cancer. Hence, we conducted a meta-analysis to quantitatively assess the clinicopathological significance and diagnosis role of APC methylation in breast cancer. In total, 3172 samples from 29 studies were performed in this study. The odds ratio (OR) of APC methylation was 5.92 (95% CI = 3.16-11.07) in breast cancer cases compared to controls,. The APC promoter methylation was associated with cancer stage (OR = 0.47, 95% CI = 0.28-0.80, P = 0.006), lymph node metastases (OR = 0.55, 95% CI = 0.36-0.84, P = 0.005) and ER status (OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 1.03-1.73, P = 0.003) in breast cancer. Furthermore, the sensitivity and specificity for all included studies were 0.444 (95% CI: 0.321-0.575, P < 0.0001) and 0.976 (95% CI: 0.916-0.993, P < 0.0001), respectively. These results suggested that APC promoter methylation was associated with breast cancer risk, and it could be a valuable biomarker for diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of breast cancer.

The majority of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is still poorly characterized with respect to function, interactions with protein-coding genes, and mechanisms that regulate their expression. As for protein-coding RNAs, epigenetic deregulation of lncRNA expression by alterations in DNA methylation might contribute to carcinogenesis. To provide genome-wide information on lncRNAs aberrantly methylated in breast cancer we profiled tumors of the C3(1) SV40TAg mouse model by MCIp-seq (Methylated CpG Immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing). This approach detected 69 lncRNAs differentially methylated between tumor tissue and normal mammary glands, with 26 located in antisense orientation of a protein-coding gene. One of the hypomethylated lncRNAs, 1810019D21Rik (now called Esrp2-antisense (as)) was identified in proximity to the epithelial splicing regulatory protein 2 (Esrp2) that is significantly elevated in C3(1) tumors. ESRPs were shown previously to have a dual role in carcinogenesis. Both gain and loss have been associated with poor prognosis in human cancers, but the mechanisms regulating expression are not known. In-depth analyses indicate that coordinate overexpression of Esrp2 and Esrp2-as inversely correlates with DNA methylation. Luciferase reporter gene assays support co-expression of Esrp2 and the major short Esrp2-as variant from a bidirectional promoter, and transcriptional regulation by methylation of a proximal enhancer. Ultimately, this enhancer-based regulatory mechanism provides a novel explanation for tissue-specific expression differences and upregulation of Esrp2 during carcinogenesis. Knockdown of Esrp2-as reduced Esrp2 protein levels without affecting mRNA expression and resulted in an altered transcriptional profile associated with extracellular matrix (ECM), cell motility and reduced proliferation, whereas overexpression enhanced proliferation. Our findings not only hold true for the murine tumor model, but led to the identification of an unannotated human homolog of Esrp2-as which is significantly upregulated in human breast cancer and associated with poor prognosis.. The majority of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is still poorly characterized with respect to function, interactions with protein-coding genes, and mechanisms that regulate their expression. As for protein-coding RNAs, epigenetic deregulation of lncRNA expression by alterations in DNA methylation might contribute to carcinogenesis. To provide genome-wide information on lncRNAs aberrantly methylated in breast cancer we profiled tumors of the C3(1) SV40TAg mouse model by MCIp-seq (Methylated CpG Immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing). This approach detected 69 lncRNAs differentially methylated between tumor tissue and normal mammary glands, with 26 located in antisense orientation of a protein-coding gene. One of the hypomethylated lncRNAs, 1810019D21Rik (now called Esrp2-antisense (as)) was identified in proximity to the epithelial splicing regulatory protein 2 (Esrp2) that is significantly elevated in C3(1) tumors. ESRPs were shown previously to have a dual role in carcinogenesis. Both gain and loss have been associated with poor prognosis in human cancers, but the mechanisms regulating expression are not known. In-depth analyses indicate that coordinate overexpression of Esrp2 and Esrp2-as inversely correlates with DNA methylation. Luciferase reporter gene assays support co-expression of Esrp2 and the major short Esrp2-as variant from a bidirectional promoter, and transcriptional regulation by methylation of a proximal enhancer. Ultimately, this enhancer-based regulatory mechanism provides a novel explanation for tissue-specific expression differences and upregulation of Esrp2 during carcinogenesis. Knockdown of Esrp2-as reduced Esrp2 protein levels without affecting mRNA expression and resulted in an altered transcriptional profile associated with extracellular matrix (ECM), cell motility and reduced proliferation, whereas overexpression enhanced proliferation. Our findings not only hold true for the murine tumor model, but led to the identification of an unannotated human homolog of Esrp2-as which is significantly upregulated in human breast cancer and associated with poor prognosis.

BACKGROUND: Loss of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 10 expression may be an important mechanism of tamoxifen resistance and the 5' CpG island associated with the CDK10 gene has been suggested to be a target for aberrant methylation in breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The methylation status of CDK10, RASSF1A (Ras association domain family 1A) and DAL-1 (differentially expressed in adenocarcinoma of the lung) was determined by means of methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) surgical specimens of 96 breast carcinoma patients. Reverse transcription kinetic PCR (RT-kPCR) was used for assessment of the expression of CDK10. RESULTS: The unmethylated form of CDK10, RASSF1A and DAL-1 was detected in all the samples analyzed. Methylation of the CDK10 5' region was not found in any of the 96 breast cancer samples. RASSF1A methylation was detected in 75 out of 96 (78%) and DAL-1 in 9 out of 15 (60%) breast cancer samples, respectively. Consistent with the methylation results, the expression of CDK10 was detected in all 96 samples. CONCLUSION: CDK10 is not a target for aberrant DNA methylation in breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Loss of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 10 expression may be an important mechanism of tamoxifen resistance and the 5' CpG island associated with the CDK10 gene has been suggested to be a target for aberrant methylation in breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The methylation status of CDK10, RASSF1A (Ras association domain family 1A) and DAL-1 (differentially expressed in adenocarcinoma of the lung) was determined by means of methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) surgical specimens of 96 breast carcinoma patients. Reverse transcription kinetic PCR (RT-kPCR) was used for assessment of the expression of CDK10. RESULTS: The unmethylated form of CDK10, RASSF1A and DAL-1 was detected in all the samples analyzed. Methylation of the CDK10 5' region was not found in any of the 96 breast cancer samples. RASSF1A methylation was detected in 75 out of 96 (78%) and DAL-1 in 9 out of 15 (60%) breast cancer samples, respectively. Consistent with the methylation results, the expression of CDK10 was detected in all 96 samples. CONCLUSION: CDK10 is not a target for aberrant DNA methylation in breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: As downstream mediators of PI3K /PTEN /AKT /mTORC1 pathway, the AKT isoforms play critical roles in tumorgenesis. Although the pleiotropic effects of AKT1 in breast cancer have been reported, the genetic and epigenetic characteristics of AKT1 promoter region in breast cancer remains to be identified. In this study we aimed to investigate the promoter mutation spectrum, methylation and gene expression pattern of AKT1 and their relationship with breast cancer. METHODS: By using PCR target sequence enrichment and next-generation sequencing technology, we sequenced AKT1 promoter region in pairs of breast tumor and normal tissues from 95 unselected Chinese breast cancer patients. The methylation of the promoter region and the expression profile of AKT1 in the same cohort were detected with bisulfite next-generation sequencing and qPCR, respectively. RESULTS: We identified 28 somatic mutations in 23 of the 95 (24.2%) breast cancer samples. And 19 of the 28 mutations were located in transcription factor (TF) binding sites. In the 23 patients with somatic mutations, no significant change of methylation or expression was found comparing with other patients. AKT1 promoter region was significantly hypo-methylated in tumor compared with matched normal tissue (P = 0.0014) in the 95 patients. The expression of AKT1 was significantly suppressed in tumor tissue (P = 0.0375). In clinicopathological factor analysis, AKT1 showed significant hypo-methylation (P = 0.0249) and suppressed expression (P = 0.0375) in HER2 negative subtype. And a trend of decrease in expression level (P = 0.0624) of AKT1 in the ER negative subtype was observed, which is significantly decreased in basal-like breast tumor (P = 0.0328). CONCLUSIONS: Hypo-methylation and suppressed expression of AKT1 was observed to be associated with breast cancer in our cohort. The methylation and expression of AKT1 were both significantly associated with HER2 status. The promoter mutation of AKT1 did not show significant association with its methylation and expression status. These results suggested that the promoter mutation, methylation and gene expression of AKT1 may play distinct roles in tumorgenesis of breast cancer and the integrated analysis of methylation and expression of AKT1 might serve as potential biomarkers for diagnosis and classification of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: As downstream mediators of PI3K /PTEN /AKT /mTORC1 pathway, the AKT isoforms play critical roles in tumorgenesis. Although the pleiotropic effects of AKT1 in breast cancer have been reported, the genetic and epigenetic characteristics of AKT1 promoter region in breast cancer remains to be identified. In this study we aimed to investigate the promoter mutation spectrum, methylation and gene expression pattern of AKT1 and their relationship with breast cancer. METHODS: By using PCR target sequence enrichment and next-generation sequencing technology, we sequenced AKT1 promoter region in pairs of breast tumor and normal tissues from 95 unselected Chinese breast cancer patients. The methylation of the promoter region and the expression profile of AKT1 in the same cohort were detected with bisulfite next-generation sequencing and qPCR, respectively. RESULTS: We identified 28 somatic mutations in 23 of the 95 (24.2%) breast cancer samples. And 19 of the 28 mutations were located in transcription factor (TF) binding sites. In the 23 patients with somatic mutations, no significant change of methylation or expression was found comparing with other patients. AKT1 promoter region was significantly hypo-methylated in tumor compared with matched normal tissue (P = 0.0014) in the 95 patients. The expression of AKT1 was significantly suppressed in tumor tissue (P = 0.0375). In clinicopathological factor analysis, AKT1 showed significant hypo-methylation (P = 0.0249) and suppressed expression (P = 0.0375) in HER2 negative subtype. And a trend of decrease in expression level (P = 0.0624) of AKT1 in the ER negative subtype was observed, which is significantly decreased in basal-like breast tumor (P = 0.0328). CONCLUSIONS: Hypo-methylation and suppressed expression of AKT1 was observed to be associated with breast cancer in our cohort. The methylation and expression of AKT1 were both significantly associated with HER2 status. The promoter mutation of AKT1 did not show significant association with its methylation and expression status. These results suggested that the promoter mutation, methylation and gene expression of AKT1 may play distinct roles in tumorgenesis of breast cancer and the integrated analysis of methylation and expression of AKT1 might serve as potential biomarkers for diagnosis and classification of breast cancer.

Telomeres at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes play a critical role in tumorgenesis. Using microfluidic PCR and next-generation bisulfite sequencing technology, we investigated the promoter methylation of 29 telomere related genes in paired tumor and normal tissues from 184 breast cancer patients. The expression of significantly differentially methylated genes was quantified using qPCR method.We observed that the average methylation level of the 29 telomere related genes was significant higher in tumor than that in normal tissues (P = 4.30E-21). A total of 4 genes (RAD50, RTEL, TERC and TRF1) showed significant hyper-methylation in breast tumor tissues. RAD51D showed significant methylation difference among the four breast cancer subtypes. The methylation of TERC showed significant association with ER status of breast cancer. The expression profiles of the 4 hyper-methylated genes showed significantly reduced expression in tumor tissues. The integration analysis of methylation and expression of these 4 genes showed a good performance in breast cancer prediction (AUC = 0.947).Our results revealed the methylation pattern of telomere related genes in breast cancer and suggested a novel 4-gene panel might be a valuable biomarker for breast cancer diagnosis.. Telomeres at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes play a critical role in tumorgenesis. Using microfluidic PCR and next-generation bisulfite sequencing technology, we investigated the promoter methylation of 29 telomere related genes in paired tumor and normal tissues from 184 breast cancer patients. The expression of significantly differentially methylated genes was quantified using qPCR method.We observed that the average methylation level of the 29 telomere related genes was significant higher in tumor than that in normal tissues (P = 4.30E-21). A total of 4 genes (RAD50, RTEL, TERC and TRF1) showed significant hyper-methylation in breast tumor tissues. RAD51D showed significant methylation difference among the four breast cancer subtypes. The methylation of TERC showed significant association with ER status of breast cancer. The expression profiles of the 4 hyper-methylated genes showed significantly reduced expression in tumor tissues. The integration analysis of methylation and expression of these 4 genes showed a good performance in breast cancer prediction (AUC = 0.947).Our results revealed the methylation pattern of telomere related genes in breast cancer and suggested a novel 4-gene panel might be a valuable biomarker for breast cancer diagnosis.

Our previously published data link P-selectin-reactive chondroitin sulfate structures on the surface of breast cancer cells to metastatic behavior of cells. We have shown that a particular sulfation pattern mediated by the expression of carbohydrate (chondroitin 4) sulfotransferase-11 (CHST11) correlates with P-selectin binding and aggressiveness of human breast cancer cell lines. The present study was performed to evaluate the prognostic value of CHST11 expression and determine whether aberrant DNA methylation controls CHST11 expression in breast cancer. Publicly available datasets were used to examine the association of CHST11 expression to aggressiveness and progression of breast cancer. Methylation status was analyzed using bisulfite genomic sequencing. 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AzadC) was used for DNA demethylation. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing was performed in the CpG island of CHST11 with a minimum coverage of 10. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was employed to confirm the expression profile of CHST11 in breast cancer cell lines. Flow cytometry was also used to confirm the expression of the CHST11 product, chondroitin sulfate A (CS-A). The expression of CHST11 was significantly higher in basal-like and Her2-amplified cell lines compared to luminal cell lines. CHST11 was also highly expressed in cancer tissues compared to normal tissues and the expression levels were significantly associated with tumor progression. We observed very low levels of DNA methylation in a CpG island of CHST11 in basal-like cells but very high levels in the same region in luminal cells. Treatment of MCF7 cells, a luminal cell line with very low expression of CHST11, with 5AzadC increased the expression of CHST11 and its immediate product, CS-A, in a dose-dependent manner. These results suggest that CHST11 may play a direct role in progression of breast cancer and that its expression is controlled by DNA methylation. Therefore, in addition to CHST11 mRNA levels, the methylation status of this gene also has potential as a prognostic biomarker.. Our previously published data link P-selectin-reactive chondroitin sulfate structures on the surface of breast cancer cells to metastatic behavior of cells. We have shown that a particular sulfation pattern mediated by the expression of carbohydrate (chondroitin 4) sulfotransferase-11 (CHST11) correlates with P-selectin binding and aggressiveness of human breast cancer cell lines. The present study was performed to evaluate the prognostic value of CHST11 expression and determine whether aberrant DNA methylation controls CHST11 expression in breast cancer. Publicly available datasets were used to examine the association of CHST11 expression to aggressiveness and progression of breast cancer. Methylation status was analyzed using bisulfite genomic sequencing. 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AzadC) was used for DNA demethylation. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing was performed in the CpG island of CHST11 with a minimum coverage of 10. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was employed to confirm the expression profile of CHST11 in breast cancer cell lines. Flow cytometry was also used to confirm the expression of the CHST11 product, chondroitin sulfate A (CS-A). The expression of CHST11 was significantly higher in basal-like and Her2-amplified cell lines compared to luminal cell lines. CHST11 was also highly expressed in cancer tissues compared to normal tissues and the expression levels were significantly associated with tumor progression. We observed very low levels of DNA methylation in a CpG island of CHST11 in basal-like cells but very high levels in the same region in luminal cells. Treatment of MCF7 cells, a luminal cell line with very low expression of CHST11, with 5AzadC increased the expression of CHST11 and its immediate product, CS-A, in a dose-dependent manner. These results suggest that CHST11 may play a direct role in progression of breast cancer and that its expression is controlled by DNA methylation. Therefore, in addition to CHST11 mRNA levels, the methylation status of this gene also has potential as a prognostic biomarker.

Using whole blood from 15 twin pairs discordant for breast cancer and high-resolution (450K) DNA methylation analysis, we identified 403 differentially methylated CpG sites including known and novel potential breast cancer genes. Confirming the results in an independent validation cohort of 21 twin pairs determined the docking protein DOK7 as a candidate for blood-based cancer diagnosis. DNA hypermethylation of the promoter region was also seen in primary breast cancer tissues and cancer cell lines. Hypermethylation of DOK7 occurs years before tumor diagnosis, suggesting a role as a powerful epigenetic blood-based biomarker as well as providing insights into breast cancer pathogenesis.. Using whole blood from 15 twin pairs discordant for breast cancer and high-resolution (450K) DNA methylation analysis, we identified 403 differentially methylated CpG sites including known and novel potential breast cancer genes. Confirming the results in an independent validation cohort of 21 twin pairs determined the docking protein DOK7 as a candidate for blood-based cancer diagnosis. DNA hypermethylation of the promoter region was also seen in primary breast cancer tissues and cancer cell lines. Hypermethylation of DOK7 occurs years before tumor diagnosis, suggesting a role as a powerful epigenetic blood-based biomarker as well as providing insights into breast cancer pathogenesis.

Epigenetic profiling of tumor DNAs may reveal important new theranostic targets to improve prognosis and treatment of advanced cancer patients. In this study, we performed a genome-wide profile of DNA methylation patterns in sporadic breast tumors by using the HumanMethylation27 BeadChips to assess relationships between DNA methylation changes and patient tumor characteristics. The arrays identified 264 hypermethylated loci/genes present in genomic CpG islands. Hierarchical clustering based on methylation levels divided the specimens into three distinct groups, within which certain clinical features also clustered. Statistically significant differences were determined between overall methylation levels of these clusters and estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status (P = 0.001), tumor relapse (P = 0.035), and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.042). We identified several individual methylated genes associated with clinical features, including six genes (RECK, SFRP2, UAP1L1, ACADL, ITR, and UGT3A1) that showed statistical significance between methylation and relapse-free survival. Notably, the RECK gene in this group has been associated in other cancers with poorest prognosis. Among the leading relapse-associated genes and the genes associated with ER/PR status, we sequenced an independent set of paired normal/tumor breast DNA samples to confirm tumor specificity of methylation. Further, we carried out quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR to confirm reduced expression in methylated tumors. Our findings suggest the utility for the DNA methylation patterns in these genes as clinically useful surrogate markers in breast cancer, as well as new molecular pathways for further investigation as therapeutic targets.. Epigenetic profiling of tumor DNAs may reveal important new theranostic targets to improve prognosis and treatment of advanced cancer patients. In this study, we performed a genome-wide profile of DNA methylation patterns in sporadic breast tumors by using the HumanMethylation27 BeadChips to assess relationships between DNA methylation changes and patient tumor characteristics. The arrays identified 264 hypermethylated loci/genes present in genomic CpG islands. Hierarchical clustering based on methylation levels divided the specimens into three distinct groups, within which certain clinical features also clustered. Statistically significant differences were determined between overall methylation levels of these clusters and estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status (P = 0.001), tumor relapse (P = 0.035), and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.042). We identified several individual methylated genes associated with clinical features, including six genes (RECK, SFRP2, UAP1L1, ACADL, ITR, and UGT3A1) that showed statistical significance between methylation and relapse-free survival. Notably, the RECK gene in this group has been associated in other cancers with poorest prognosis. Among the leading relapse-associated genes and the genes associated with ER/PR status, we sequenced an independent set of paired normal/tumor breast DNA samples to confirm tumor specificity of methylation. Further, we carried out quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase PCR to confirm reduced expression in methylated tumors. Our findings suggest the utility for the DNA methylation patterns in these genes as clinically useful surrogate markers in breast cancer, as well as new molecular pathways for further investigation as therapeutic targets.

INTRODUCTION: Five different molecular subtypes of breast cancer have been identified through gene expression profiling. Each subtype has a characteristic expression pattern suggested to partly depend on cellular origin. We aimed to investigate whether the molecular subtypes also display distinct methylation profiles. METHODS: We analysed methylation status of 807 cancer-related genes in 189 fresh frozen primary breast tumours and four normal breast tissue samples using an array-based methylation assay. RESULTS: Unsupervised analysis revealed three groups of breast cancer with characteristic methylation patterns. The three groups were associated with the luminal A, luminal B and basal-like molecular subtypes of breast cancer, respectively, whereas cancers of the HER2-enriched and normal-like subtypes were distributed among the three groups. The methylation frequencies were significantly different between subtypes, with luminal B and basal-like tumours being most and least frequently methylated, respectively. Moreover, targets of the polycomb repressor complex in breast cancer and embryonic stem cells were more methylated in luminal B tumours than in other tumours. BRCA2-mutated tumours had a particularly high degree of methylation. Finally, by utilizing gene expression data, we observed that a large fraction of genes reported as having subtype-specific expression patterns might be regulated through methylation. CONCLUSIONS: We have found that breast cancers of the basal-like, luminal A and luminal B molecular subtypes harbour specific methylation profiles. Our results suggest that methylation may play an important role in the development of breast cancers.. INTRODUCTION: Five different molecular subtypes of breast cancer have been identified through gene expression profiling. Each subtype has a characteristic expression pattern suggested to partly depend on cellular origin. We aimed to investigate whether the molecular subtypes also display distinct methylation profiles. METHODS: We analysed methylation status of 807 cancer-related genes in 189 fresh frozen primary breast tumours and four normal breast tissue samples using an array-based methylation assay. RESULTS: Unsupervised analysis revealed three groups of breast cancer with characteristic methylation patterns. The three groups were associated with the luminal A, luminal B and basal-like molecular subtypes of breast cancer, respectively, whereas cancers of the HER2-enriched and normal-like subtypes were distributed among the three groups. The methylation frequencies were significantly different between subtypes, with luminal B and basal-like tumours being most and least frequently methylated, respectively. Moreover, targets of the polycomb repressor complex in breast cancer and embryonic stem cells were more methylated in luminal B tumours than in other tumours. BRCA2-mutated tumours had a particularly high degree of methylation. Finally, by utilizing gene expression data, we observed that a large fraction of genes reported as having subtype-specific expression patterns might be regulated through methylation. CONCLUSIONS: We have found that breast cancers of the basal-like, luminal A and luminal B molecular subtypes harbour specific methylation profiles. Our results suggest that methylation may play an important role in the development of breast cancers.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently observed in breast cancer. However, the relationship between methylation patterns and the heterogeneity of breast cancer has not been comprehensively characterized. METHODS: Whole-genome DNA methylation analysis using Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays was performed on 188 human breast tumors. Unsupervised bootstrap consensus clustering was performed to identify DNA methylation epigenetic subgroups (epitypes). The Cancer Genome Atlas data, including methylation profiles of 669 human breast tumors, was used for validation. The identified epitypes were characterized by integration with publicly available genome-wide data, including gene expression levels, DNA copy numbers, whole-exome sequencing data, and chromatin states. RESULTS: We identified seven breast cancer epitypes. One epitype was distinctly associated with basal-like tumors and with BRCA1 mutations, one epitype contained a subset of ERBB2-amplified tumors characterized by multiple additional amplifications and the most complex genomes, and one epitype displayed a methylation profile similar to normal epithelial cells. Luminal tumors were stratified into the remaining four epitypes, with differences in promoter hypermethylation, global hypomethylation, proliferative rates, and genomic instability. Specific hyper- and hypomethylation across the basal-like epitype was rare. However, we observed that the candidate genomic instability drivers BRCA1 and HORMAD1 displayed aberrant methylation linked to gene expression levels in some basal-like tumors. Hypomethylation in luminal tumors was associated with DNA repeats and subtelomeric regions. We observed two dominant patterns of aberrant methylation in breast cancer. One pattern, constitutively methylated in both basal-like and luminal breast cancer, was linked to genes with promoters in a Polycomb-repressed state in normal epithelial cells and displayed no correlation with gene expression levels. The second pattern correlated with gene expression levels and was associated with methylation in luminal tumors and genes with active promoters in normal epithelial cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that hypermethylation patterns across basal-like breast cancer may have limited influence on tumor progression and instead reflect the repressed chromatin state of the tissue of origin. On the contrary, hypermethylation patterns specific to luminal breast cancer influence gene expression, may contribute to tumor progression, and may present an actionable epigenetic alteration in a subset of luminal breast cancers.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently observed in breast cancer. However, the relationship between methylation patterns and the heterogeneity of breast cancer has not been comprehensively characterized. METHODS: Whole-genome DNA methylation analysis using Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip arrays was performed on 188 human breast tumors. Unsupervised bootstrap consensus clustering was performed to identify DNA methylation epigenetic subgroups (epitypes). The Cancer Genome Atlas data, including methylation profiles of 669 human breast tumors, was used for validation. The identified epitypes were characterized by integration with publicly available genome-wide data, including gene expression levels, DNA copy numbers, whole-exome sequencing data, and chromatin states. RESULTS: We identified seven breast cancer epitypes. One epitype was distinctly associated with basal-like tumors and with BRCA1 mutations, one epitype contained a subset of ERBB2-amplified tumors characterized by multiple additional amplifications and the most complex genomes, and one epitype displayed a methylation profile similar to normal epithelial cells. Luminal tumors were stratified into the remaining four epitypes, with differences in promoter hypermethylation, global hypomethylation, proliferative rates, and genomic instability. Specific hyper- and hypomethylation across the basal-like epitype was rare. However, we observed that the candidate genomic instability drivers BRCA1 and HORMAD1 displayed aberrant methylation linked to gene expression levels in some basal-like tumors. Hypomethylation in luminal tumors was associated with DNA repeats and subtelomeric regions. We observed two dominant patterns of aberrant methylation in breast cancer. One pattern, constitutively methylated in both basal-like and luminal breast cancer, was linked to genes with promoters in a Polycomb-repressed state in normal epithelial cells and displayed no correlation with gene expression levels. The second pattern correlated with gene expression levels and was associated with methylation in luminal tumors and genes with active promoters in normal epithelial cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that hypermethylation patterns across basal-like breast cancer may have limited influence on tumor progression and instead reflect the repressed chromatin state of the tissue of origin. On the contrary, hypermethylation patterns specific to luminal breast cancer influence gene expression, may contribute to tumor progression, and may present an actionable epigenetic alteration in a subset of luminal breast cancers.

PURPOSE: Novel approaches to breast cancer screening are necessary, especially in the developing world where mammography is not feasible. In this study, we explored the hypothesis that blood-based biomarkers have potential for biomarkers for breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We first determined the frequency of aberrant methylation of four candidate genes (APC, GSTP1, Rassf1A, and RARbeta2) in primary breast cancer tissues from West African women with predominantly advanced cancers. We used a high-throughput DNA methylation assay (quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction) to examine plasma from 93 women with breast cancer and 76 controls for the presence of four methylated genes. Samples were randomly divided evenly into training and validation data sets. Cutoff values for gene positivity of the plasma-based assay and the gene panel were determined by receiver operating characteristic curves in the training data set and subsequently evaluated as a screening tool in the validation data set. RESULTS: Methylation of at least one gene resulted in a sensitivity of 62% and a specificity of 87%. Moreover, the assay successfully detected 33% (eight of 24) of early-stage tumors. CONCLUSION: These data suggest that epigenetic markers in plasma may be of interest for detection of breast cancer. Identification of additional breast cancer specific methylated genes with higher prevalence in early stage cancers would improve this approach.. PURPOSE: Novel approaches to breast cancer screening are necessary, especially in the developing world where mammography is not feasible. In this study, we explored the hypothesis that blood-based biomarkers have potential for biomarkers for breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We first determined the frequency of aberrant methylation of four candidate genes (APC, GSTP1, Rassf1A, and RARbeta2) in primary breast cancer tissues from West African women with predominantly advanced cancers. We used a high-throughput DNA methylation assay (quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction) to examine plasma from 93 women with breast cancer and 76 controls for the presence of four methylated genes. Samples were randomly divided evenly into training and validation data sets. Cutoff values for gene positivity of the plasma-based assay and the gene panel were determined by receiver operating characteristic curves in the training data set and subsequently evaluated as a screening tool in the validation data set. RESULTS: Methylation of at least one gene resulted in a sensitivity of 62% and a specificity of 87%. Moreover, the assay successfully detected 33% (eight of 24) of early-stage tumors. CONCLUSION: These data suggest that epigenetic markers in plasma may be of interest for detection of breast cancer. Identification of additional breast cancer specific methylated genes with higher prevalence in early stage cancers would improve this approach.

Aberrant promoter methylation of several known or putative tumor suppressor genes occurs frequently during carcinogenesis, and this epigenetic change has been considered as a potential molecular marker for cancer. We examined the methylation status of nine genes (APC, CDH1, CTNNB1, TIMP3, ESR1, GSTP1, MGMT, THBS1, and TMS1), by quantitative methylation specific PCR. Synchronous preinvasive lesions (atypical ductal hyperplasia and/or ductal carcinoma in situ) and invasive ductal breast carcinoma from 52 patients, together with pure lesions from 24 patients and 12 normal tissues paired to tumor and 20 normal breast distant from tumor were analyzed. Aberrant promoter methylation was detected in both preinvasive and invasive lesions for genes APC, CDH1, CTNNB1, TIMP3, ESR1, and GSTP1. However, hierarchical mixed model and Generalized Estimating Equations model analyses showed that only APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 promoter regions showed a higher frequency and methylation levels in pathologic samples when compared with normal breast. Whereas APC and CTNNB1 did not show differences in methylation levels or frequencies, CDH1 showed higher methylation levels in invasive tumors as compared with preinvasive lesions (P < 0.04, Mann-Whitney test with permutation correction). The analysis of APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 methylation status was able to distinguish between normal and pathologic samples with a sensitivity of 67% (95% confidence interval, 60-71%) and a specificity of 75% (95% confidence interval, 69-81%). Our data point to the direct involvement of APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 promoter methylation in the early stages of breast cancer progression and suggest that they may represent a useful tool for the detection of tumor cells in clinical specimens.. Aberrant promoter methylation of several known or putative tumor suppressor genes occurs frequently during carcinogenesis, and this epigenetic change has been considered as a potential molecular marker for cancer. We examined the methylation status of nine genes (APC, CDH1, CTNNB1, TIMP3, ESR1, GSTP1, MGMT, THBS1, and TMS1), by quantitative methylation specific PCR. Synchronous preinvasive lesions (atypical ductal hyperplasia and/or ductal carcinoma in situ) and invasive ductal breast carcinoma from 52 patients, together with pure lesions from 24 patients and 12 normal tissues paired to tumor and 20 normal breast distant from tumor were analyzed. Aberrant promoter methylation was detected in both preinvasive and invasive lesions for genes APC, CDH1, CTNNB1, TIMP3, ESR1, and GSTP1. However, hierarchical mixed model and Generalized Estimating Equations model analyses showed that only APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 promoter regions showed a higher frequency and methylation levels in pathologic samples when compared with normal breast. Whereas APC and CTNNB1 did not show differences in methylation levels or frequencies, CDH1 showed higher methylation levels in invasive tumors as compared with preinvasive lesions (P < 0.04, Mann-Whitney test with permutation correction). The analysis of APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 methylation status was able to distinguish between normal and pathologic samples with a sensitivity of 67% (95% confidence interval, 60-71%) and a specificity of 75% (95% confidence interval, 69-81%). Our data point to the direct involvement of APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 promoter methylation in the early stages of breast cancer progression and suggest that they may represent a useful tool for the detection of tumor cells in clinical specimens.

Epigenetic modifications are involved in breast carcinogenesis. Identifying genes that are epigenetically silenced via methylation could select target patients for diagnostic as well as therapeutic potential. We assessed promoter methylation of breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) and 17 Beta Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 (17betaHSD-1) in normal and cancer breast tissues of forty sporadic breast cancer (BC) cases using restriction enzyme based methylation-specific PCR (REMS-PCR). In cancerous tissues, BRCA1 and 17betaHSD-1 were methylated in 42.5% and 97.5%, respectively, while normal tissues had 35% and 95% methylation, respectively. BRCA1 methylation in normal tissues was 12.2-fold more likely to associate with methylation in cancer tissues (p < 0.001). It correlated significantly with increased age at menopause, mitosis, the negative status of Her2, and the molecular subtype "luminal A" (p = 0.048, p = 0.042, p = 0.007, and p = 0.049, resp.). Methylation of BRCA1 and 17betaHSD-1 related to luminal A subtype of breast cancer. Since a small proportion of normal breast epithelial cells had BRCA1 methylation, our preliminary findings suggest that methylation of BRCA1 may be involved in breast tumors initiation and progression; therefore, it could be used as a biomarker for the early detection of sporadic breast cancer. Methylation of 17betaHSD-1 in normal and cancer tissue could save patients the long term use of adjuvant antiestrogen therapies.. Epigenetic modifications are involved in breast carcinogenesis. Identifying genes that are epigenetically silenced via methylation could select target patients for diagnostic as well as therapeutic potential. We assessed promoter methylation of breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) and 17 Beta Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 (17betaHSD-1) in normal and cancer breast tissues of forty sporadic breast cancer (BC) cases using restriction enzyme based methylation-specific PCR (REMS-PCR). In cancerous tissues, BRCA1 and 17betaHSD-1 were methylated in 42.5% and 97.5%, respectively, while normal tissues had 35% and 95% methylation, respectively. BRCA1 methylation in normal tissues was 12.2-fold more likely to associate with methylation in cancer tissues (p < 0.001). It correlated significantly with increased age at menopause, mitosis, the negative status of Her2, and the molecular subtype "luminal A" (p = 0.048, p = 0.042, p = 0.007, and p = 0.049, resp.). Methylation of BRCA1 and 17betaHSD-1 related to luminal A subtype of breast cancer. Since a small proportion of normal breast epithelial cells had BRCA1 methylation, our preliminary findings suggest that methylation of BRCA1 may be involved in breast tumors initiation and progression; therefore, it could be used as a biomarker for the early detection of sporadic breast cancer. Methylation of 17betaHSD-1 in normal and cancer tissue could save patients the long term use of adjuvant antiestrogen therapies.

Historically, breast cancer classification has relied on prognostic subtypes. Thus, unlike hematopoietic cancers, breast tumor classification lacks phylogenetic rationale. The feasibility of phylogenetic classification of breast tumors has recently been demonstrated based on estrogen receptor (ER), androgen receptor (AR), vitamin D receptor (VDR) and Keratin 5 expression. Four hormonal states (HR0-3) comprising 11 cellular subtypes of breast cells have been proposed. This classification scheme has been shown to have relevance to clinical prognosis. We examine the implications of such phylogenetic classification on DNA methylation of both breast tumors and normal breast tissues by applying recently developed deconvolution algorithms to three DNA methylation data sets archived on Gene Expression Omnibus. We propose that breast tumors arising from a particular cell-of-origin essentially magnify the epigenetic state of their original cell type. We demonstrate that DNA methylation of tumors manifests patterns consistent with cell-specific epigenetic states, that these states correspond roughly to previously posited normal breast cell types, and that estimates of proportions of the underlying cell types are predictive of tumor phenotypes. Taken together, these findings suggest that the epigenetics of breast tumors is ultimately based on the underlying phylogeny of normal breast tissue.. Historically, breast cancer classification has relied on prognostic subtypes. Thus, unlike hematopoietic cancers, breast tumor classification lacks phylogenetic rationale. The feasibility of phylogenetic classification of breast tumors has recently been demonstrated based on estrogen receptor (ER), androgen receptor (AR), vitamin D receptor (VDR) and Keratin 5 expression. Four hormonal states (HR0-3) comprising 11 cellular subtypes of breast cells have been proposed. This classification scheme has been shown to have relevance to clinical prognosis. We examine the implications of such phylogenetic classification on DNA methylation of both breast tumors and normal breast tissues by applying recently developed deconvolution algorithms to three DNA methylation data sets archived on Gene Expression Omnibus. We propose that breast tumors arising from a particular cell-of-origin essentially magnify the epigenetic state of their original cell type. We demonstrate that DNA methylation of tumors manifests patterns consistent with cell-specific epigenetic states, that these states correspond roughly to previously posited normal breast cell types, and that estimates of proportions of the underlying cell types are predictive of tumor phenotypes. Taken together, these findings suggest that the epigenetics of breast tumors is ultimately based on the underlying phylogeny of normal breast tissue.

BRCA1-associated breast cancers are associated with particular features such as early onset, poor histological differentiation, and hormone receptor negativity. Previous studies conducted in Taiwanese population showed that the mutation of BRCA1 gene does not play a significant role in the occurrence of breast cancer. The present study explored methylation of BRCA1 promoter and its relationship to clinical features and outcome in Taiwanese breast cancer patients. Tumor specimens from a cohort of 139 early-stage breast cancer patients were obtained during surgery before adjuvant treatment for DNA extraction. Methylation of BRCA1 promoter region was determined by methylation-specific PCR and the results were related to clinical features and outcome of patients using statistical analysis. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in 78 (56%) of the 139 tumors. Chi-square analysis indicated that BRCA1 promoter methylation correlated significantly with triple-negative (ER-/PR-/HER2-) status of breast cancer patients (p = 0.041). The Kaplan-Meier method showed that BRCA1 promoter methylation was significantly associated with poor overall survival (p = 0.026) and disease-free survival (p = 0.001). Multivariate analysis which incorporated variables of patients' age, tumor size, grade, and lymph node metastasis revealed that BRCA1 promoter methylation was associated with overall survival (p = 0.027; hazard ratio, 16.38) and disease-free survival (p = 0.003; hazard ratio, 12.19) [corrected].Our findings underscore the clinical relevance of the methylation of BRCA1 promoter in Taiwanese patients with early-stage breast cancer.. BRCA1-associated breast cancers are associated with particular features such as early onset, poor histological differentiation, and hormone receptor negativity. Previous studies conducted in Taiwanese population showed that the mutation of BRCA1 gene does not play a significant role in the occurrence of breast cancer. The present study explored methylation of BRCA1 promoter and its relationship to clinical features and outcome in Taiwanese breast cancer patients. Tumor specimens from a cohort of 139 early-stage breast cancer patients were obtained during surgery before adjuvant treatment for DNA extraction. Methylation of BRCA1 promoter region was determined by methylation-specific PCR and the results were related to clinical features and outcome of patients using statistical analysis. Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in 78 (56%) of the 139 tumors. Chi-square analysis indicated that BRCA1 promoter methylation correlated significantly with triple-negative (ER-/PR-/HER2-) status of breast cancer patients (p = 0.041). The Kaplan-Meier method showed that BRCA1 promoter methylation was significantly associated with poor overall survival (p = 0.026) and disease-free survival (p = 0.001). Multivariate analysis which incorporated variables of patients' age, tumor size, grade, and lymph node metastasis revealed that BRCA1 promoter methylation was associated with overall survival (p = 0.027; hazard ratio, 16.38) and disease-free survival (p = 0.003; hazard ratio, 12.19) [corrected].Our findings underscore the clinical relevance of the methylation of BRCA1 promoter in Taiwanese patients with early-stage breast cancer.

Promoter methylation is an important mechanism of regulating E-cadherin expression. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) assay was done to evaluate the promoter methylation status of E-cadherin gene in primary tumor samples from 23 cases of Chinese women with invasive ductal breast cancers. Western blotting assay was employed for E-cadherin and beta-actin expressions. Positive MSP results occurred in 26.1% (6/23) of primary tumor samples and none of four normal skin samples. These molecular events tended to occur in breast cancers associated with poor prognosis. Whereas the mean ratio of CDH1/beta-actin for six MSP-positive cases was 0.0290 +/- 0.0355, the mean ratio for 17 MSP-negative cases was 0.4726 +/- 0.5049 (P = 0.046). In conclusion, aberrant E-cadherin methylation preferentially occurs in invasive ductal breast cancer associated with poor prognosis and is one of the mechanisms of E-cadherin expression silence in breast cancers from Chinese women.. Promoter methylation is an important mechanism of regulating E-cadherin expression. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) assay was done to evaluate the promoter methylation status of E-cadherin gene in primary tumor samples from 23 cases of Chinese women with invasive ductal breast cancers. Western blotting assay was employed for E-cadherin and beta-actin expressions. Positive MSP results occurred in 26.1% (6/23) of primary tumor samples and none of four normal skin samples. These molecular events tended to occur in breast cancers associated with poor prognosis. Whereas the mean ratio of CDH1/beta-actin for six MSP-positive cases was 0.0290 +/- 0.0355, the mean ratio for 17 MSP-negative cases was 0.4726 +/- 0.5049 (P = 0.046). In conclusion, aberrant E-cadherin methylation preferentially occurs in invasive ductal breast cancer associated with poor prognosis and is one of the mechanisms of E-cadherin expression silence in breast cancers from Chinese women.

Progressive p16 methylation has been associated with metastasis and invasive phenotypes in many cancers. Loss of E-cadherin (CDH1) function contributes to breast cancer progression by promoting cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Using methylation-specific PCR, aberrant hypermethylation of p16 and CDH1 in tumor and plasma was analyzed and correlated with levels of serum protein markers, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carcinoma antigen 15-3 (CA15.3), in 36 patients with invasive ductal breast cancer. Aberrant p16 methylation was found in 11% (4/36) of primary tumors and 8% (3/36) of plasma samples. Aberrant CDH1 methylation was detected in 25% (9/36) of primary tumors and 20% (7/36) of plasma samples. p16 and/or CDH1 hypermethylation was found in 31% (11/36) of primary breast carcinomas and 82% (9/11) of breast cancer patients with tumoral methylation showing identical epigenetic changes in plasma. The 25 patients without tumoral methylation did not show epigenetic changes in the plasma. Tumoral p16 methylation was significantly associated with advanced tumor stage (p=0.028; Fisher's exact test), tumor size (p=0.017) and nodal metastasis (p=0.002). However, p16 methylation in plasma was only associated with nodal metastasis (p=0.012). Altogether, aberrant p16 methylation in plasma and elevated serum CEA level were associated with advanced tumor stage (p=0.033), tumor size (p=0.022) and extensive nodal metastasis (p=0.003). With clinical implications, p16 hypermethylation in plasma and/or raised serum CEA levels may prove useful as diagnostic and prognostic markers for breast cancer.. Progressive p16 methylation has been associated with metastasis and invasive phenotypes in many cancers. Loss of E-cadherin (CDH1) function contributes to breast cancer progression by promoting cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Using methylation-specific PCR, aberrant hypermethylation of p16 and CDH1 in tumor and plasma was analyzed and correlated with levels of serum protein markers, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carcinoma antigen 15-3 (CA15.3), in 36 patients with invasive ductal breast cancer. Aberrant p16 methylation was found in 11% (4/36) of primary tumors and 8% (3/36) of plasma samples. Aberrant CDH1 methylation was detected in 25% (9/36) of primary tumors and 20% (7/36) of plasma samples. p16 and/or CDH1 hypermethylation was found in 31% (11/36) of primary breast carcinomas and 82% (9/11) of breast cancer patients with tumoral methylation showing identical epigenetic changes in plasma. The 25 patients without tumoral methylation did not show epigenetic changes in the plasma. Tumoral p16 methylation was significantly associated with advanced tumor stage (p=0.028; Fisher's exact test), tumor size (p=0.017) and nodal metastasis (p=0.002). However, p16 methylation in plasma was only associated with nodal metastasis (p=0.012). Altogether, aberrant p16 methylation in plasma and elevated serum CEA level were associated with advanced tumor stage (p=0.033), tumor size (p=0.022) and extensive nodal metastasis (p=0.003). With clinical implications, p16 hypermethylation in plasma and/or raised serum CEA levels may prove useful as diagnostic and prognostic markers for breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and fumarate hydratase (FH) are tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes that are also known to act as tumour suppressor genes. Increased succinate or fumarate levels as a consequence of SDH and FH deficiency inhibit hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) prolyl hydroxylases leading to sustained HIF-1alpha expression in tumours. Since HIF-1alpha is frequently expressed in breast carcinomas, DNA methylation at the promoter regions of the SDHA, SDHB, SDHC and SDHD and FH genes was evaluated as a possible mechanism in silencing of SDH and FH expression in breast carcinomas. FINDINGS: No DNA methylation was identified in the promoter regions of the SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD and FH genes in 72 breast carcinomas and 10 breast cancer cell lines using methylation-sensitive high resolution melting which detects both homogeneous and heterogeneous methylation. CONCLUSION: These results show that inactivation via DNA methylation of the promoter CpG islands of SDH and FH is unlikely to play a major role in sporadic breast carcinomas.. BACKGROUND: Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and fumarate hydratase (FH) are tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle enzymes that are also known to act as tumour suppressor genes. Increased succinate or fumarate levels as a consequence of SDH and FH deficiency inhibit hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) prolyl hydroxylases leading to sustained HIF-1alpha expression in tumours. Since HIF-1alpha is frequently expressed in breast carcinomas, DNA methylation at the promoter regions of the SDHA, SDHB, SDHC and SDHD and FH genes was evaluated as a possible mechanism in silencing of SDH and FH expression in breast carcinomas. FINDINGS: No DNA methylation was identified in the promoter regions of the SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD and FH genes in 72 breast carcinomas and 10 breast cancer cell lines using methylation-sensitive high resolution melting which detects both homogeneous and heterogeneous methylation. CONCLUSION: These results show that inactivation via DNA methylation of the promoter CpG islands of SDH and FH is unlikely to play a major role in sporadic breast carcinomas.

pVHL is the central component of an ubiquitin ligase complex that targets hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) for proteasomal degradation. This complex includes four other genes, Cullin 2 (CUL2), elongin C (TCEB1), elongin B (TCEB2) and ring-box 1 (RBX1). VHL has previously been reported to be methylated in sporadic renal cell carcinoma. Since HIF-1alpha is frequently expressed in breast carcinomas, we evaluated DNA methylation as a possible mechanism of silencing one or more of the VHL complex genes. Methylation-specific high resolution melting (MS-HRM) was used to screen the proximal promoter CpG islands for methylation of the VHL ubiquitin ligase complex genes. We were unable to identify methylation of any of the five genes in 84 breast carcinoma samples or in a range of cancer cell lines including 13 breast cancer cell lines of various subtypes. We were able, however, to identify VHL methylation in control renal cell carcinoma samples. Epigenetic silencing by promoter DNA methylation for VHL and the complex genes, CUL2, elongin C (TCEB1), elongin B (TCEB2) and RBX1, is unlikely to play a role in HIF-1alpha upregulation in breast carcinomas.. pVHL is the central component of an ubiquitin ligase complex that targets hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) for proteasomal degradation. This complex includes four other genes, Cullin 2 (CUL2), elongin C (TCEB1), elongin B (TCEB2) and ring-box 1 (RBX1). VHL has previously been reported to be methylated in sporadic renal cell carcinoma. Since HIF-1alpha is frequently expressed in breast carcinomas, we evaluated DNA methylation as a possible mechanism of silencing one or more of the VHL complex genes. Methylation-specific high resolution melting (MS-HRM) was used to screen the proximal promoter CpG islands for methylation of the VHL ubiquitin ligase complex genes. We were unable to identify methylation of any of the five genes in 84 breast carcinoma samples or in a range of cancer cell lines including 13 breast cancer cell lines of various subtypes. We were able, however, to identify VHL methylation in control renal cell carcinoma samples. Epigenetic silencing by promoter DNA methylation for VHL and the complex genes, CUL2, elongin C (TCEB1), elongin B (TCEB2) and RBX1, is unlikely to play a role in HIF-1alpha upregulation in breast carcinomas.

Phyllodes tumours and cellular fibroadenomas are both fibroepithelial tumours of the breast. Phyllodes tumours, unlike fibroadenomas, have the ability to recur and metastasise. Although these lesions can be distinguished by their stromal cellularity, mitotic index, presence or absence of stromal overgrowth and cellular atypia, there is overlap and not infrequently a definitive diagnosis cannot be made, particularly on biopsy. We sought to evaluate whether DNA promoter methylation profiling using selected genes known to be methylated in cancer would allow us to learn more about the biology of these tumours, and whether it could identify methylation markers that could differentiate phyllodes tumours from fibroadenomas and/or distinguish phyllodes tumours of different grades. Methylation-sensitive high resolution melting (MS-HRM) was used to screen promoter DNA methylation changes in 86 phyllodes tumours (15 benign, 28 borderline, 43 malignant) and 26 fibroadenomas. A panel of 11 genes (RASSF1A, TWIST1, APC, WIF1, MGMT, MAL, RARbeta, CDKN2A, CDH1, TP73 and MLH1) was tested. Methylation status was correlated with histology and with clinicopathological parameters. Five of the gene promoters showed some methylation in a proportion of phyllodes tumours; RASSF1A, 45.3%; TWIST1, 10.7%; APC, 4.1%; WIF1, 2.9% and MGMT, 1.3%. Only two genes showed any methylation in fibroadenomas usually at background levels; RASSF1A, 53.8% and MGMT, 8.3%. No CDKN2A methylation was observed in either tumour type, contrary to previous reports. Overall, the methylation patterns differed little from that which might be seen in normal cells. However, significant levels of methylation of RASSF1A (24.4%) and TWIST1 (7.1%) was observed in some phyllodes tumours. Elevated RASSF1A and/or TWIST1 methylation was significantly associated with phyllodes tumours compared with fibroadenomas (P = 0.02), TWIST1 methylation correlated with increasing malignancy in phyllodes tumours (P < 0.001). In conclusion, assessment of methylation of RASSF1A and TWIST1 may aid in the diagnosis of phyllodes tumours. The absence of frequent methylation in fibroadenomas supports a non-neoplastic origin.. Phyllodes tumours and cellular fibroadenomas are both fibroepithelial tumours of the breast. Phyllodes tumours, unlike fibroadenomas, have the ability to recur and metastasise. Although these lesions can be distinguished by their stromal cellularity, mitotic index, presence or absence of stromal overgrowth and cellular atypia, there is overlap and not infrequently a definitive diagnosis cannot be made, particularly on biopsy. We sought to evaluate whether DNA promoter methylation profiling using selected genes known to be methylated in cancer would allow us to learn more about the biology of these tumours, and whether it could identify methylation markers that could differentiate phyllodes tumours from fibroadenomas and/or distinguish phyllodes tumours of different grades. Methylation-sensitive high resolution melting (MS-HRM) was used to screen promoter DNA methylation changes in 86 phyllodes tumours (15 benign, 28 borderline, 43 malignant) and 26 fibroadenomas. A panel of 11 genes (RASSF1A, TWIST1, APC, WIF1, MGMT, MAL, RARbeta, CDKN2A, CDH1, TP73 and MLH1) was tested. Methylation status was correlated with histology and with clinicopathological parameters. Five of the gene promoters showed some methylation in a proportion of phyllodes tumours; RASSF1A, 45.3%; TWIST1, 10.7%; APC, 4.1%; WIF1, 2.9% and MGMT, 1.3%. Only two genes showed any methylation in fibroadenomas usually at background levels; RASSF1A, 53.8% and MGMT, 8.3%. No CDKN2A methylation was observed in either tumour type, contrary to previous reports. Overall, the methylation patterns differed little from that which might be seen in normal cells. However, significant levels of methylation of RASSF1A (24.4%) and TWIST1 (7.1%) was observed in some phyllodes tumours. Elevated RASSF1A and/or TWIST1 methylation was significantly associated with phyllodes tumours compared with fibroadenomas (P = 0.02), TWIST1 methylation correlated with increasing malignancy in phyllodes tumours (P < 0.001). In conclusion, assessment of methylation of RASSF1A and TWIST1 may aid in the diagnosis of phyllodes tumours. The absence of frequent methylation in fibroadenomas supports a non-neoplastic origin.

AIMS: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) activity is regulated by prolyl hydroxylase (PHD1, PHD2, PHD3) and factor inhibiting HIF-1 (FIH) that target the alpha subunit of HIF-1 (HIF-1alpha) for proteosomal degradation. We hypothesised that the elevated HIF-1alpha level is due in some tumours to epigenetic silencing by DNA hypermethylation of the promoter region of one or more of the PHDs and FIH genes. The aims were to define the presence or absence of promoter methylation of PHDs and FIH in cell lines of various sources and breast carcinomas and, if present, determine its effect on mRNA and protein expression. METHODS AND RESULTS: Tumour cell lines (n = 20) and primary invasive breast carcinomas (n = 168) were examined for promoter region DNA methylation using methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting. There was evidence of PHD3 but not of PHD1, PHD2 or FIH DNA methylation in breast cancer (SkBr3) and leukaemic (HL60 and CCRF-CEM) cell lines, but there was no evidence of methylation in any of 168 breast cancers. Only the high-level PHD3 methylation seen in leukaemic cell lines correlated with absent mRNA and protein expression. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation-induced epigenetic silencing of PHD1, PHD2, PHD3 and FIH is unlikely to underlie up-regulated HIF-1alpha expression in human breast cancer but may play a role in other tumour types.. AIMS: Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) activity is regulated by prolyl hydroxylase (PHD1, PHD2, PHD3) and factor inhibiting HIF-1 (FIH) that target the alpha subunit of HIF-1 (HIF-1alpha) for proteosomal degradation. We hypothesised that the elevated HIF-1alpha level is due in some tumours to epigenetic silencing by DNA hypermethylation of the promoter region of one or more of the PHDs and FIH genes. The aims were to define the presence or absence of promoter methylation of PHDs and FIH in cell lines of various sources and breast carcinomas and, if present, determine its effect on mRNA and protein expression. METHODS AND RESULTS: Tumour cell lines (n = 20) and primary invasive breast carcinomas (n = 168) were examined for promoter region DNA methylation using methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting. There was evidence of PHD3 but not of PHD1, PHD2 or FIH DNA methylation in breast cancer (SkBr3) and leukaemic (HL60 and CCRF-CEM) cell lines, but there was no evidence of methylation in any of 168 breast cancers. Only the high-level PHD3 methylation seen in leukaemic cell lines correlated with absent mRNA and protein expression. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation-induced epigenetic silencing of PHD1, PHD2, PHD3 and FIH is unlikely to underlie up-regulated HIF-1alpha expression in human breast cancer but may play a role in other tumour types.

BACKGROUND: Patients with breast cancer have an increased risk of developing subsequent breast cancers. It is important to distinguish whether these tumours are de novo or recurrences of the primary tumour in order to guide the appropriate therapy. Our aim was to investigate the use of DNA methylation profiling and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) to determine whether the second tumour is clonally related to the first tumour. METHODS: Methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting was used to screen promoter methylation in a panel of 13 genes reported as methylated in breast cancer (RASSF1A, TWIST1, APC, WIF1, MGMT, MAL, CDH13, RARbeta, BRCA1, CDH1, CDKN2A, TP73, and GSTP1) in 29 tumour pairs (16 ipsilateral and 13 contralateral). Using the methylation profile of these genes, we employed a Bayesian and an empirical statistical approach to estimate clonal relationship. Copy number alterations were analysed using aCGH on the same set of tumour pairs. RESULTS: There is a higher probability of the second tumour being recurrent in ipsilateral tumours compared with contralateral tumours (38 % versus 8 %; p <0.05) based on the methylation profile. Using previously reported recurrence rates as Bayesian prior probabilities, we classified 69 % of ipsilateral and 15 % of contralateral tumours as recurrent. The inferred clonal relationship results of the tumour pairs were generally concordant between methylation profiling and aCGH. CONCLUSION: Our results show that DNA methylation profiling as well as aCGH have potential as diagnostic tools in improving the clinical decisions to differentiate recurrences from a second de novo tumour.. BACKGROUND: Patients with breast cancer have an increased risk of developing subsequent breast cancers. It is important to distinguish whether these tumours are de novo or recurrences of the primary tumour in order to guide the appropriate therapy. Our aim was to investigate the use of DNA methylation profiling and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) to determine whether the second tumour is clonally related to the first tumour. METHODS: Methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting was used to screen promoter methylation in a panel of 13 genes reported as methylated in breast cancer (RASSF1A, TWIST1, APC, WIF1, MGMT, MAL, CDH13, RARbeta, BRCA1, CDH1, CDKN2A, TP73, and GSTP1) in 29 tumour pairs (16 ipsilateral and 13 contralateral). Using the methylation profile of these genes, we employed a Bayesian and an empirical statistical approach to estimate clonal relationship. Copy number alterations were analysed using aCGH on the same set of tumour pairs. RESULTS: There is a higher probability of the second tumour being recurrent in ipsilateral tumours compared with contralateral tumours (38 % versus 8 %; p <0.05) based on the methylation profile. Using previously reported recurrence rates as Bayesian prior probabilities, we classified 69 % of ipsilateral and 15 % of contralateral tumours as recurrent. The inferred clonal relationship results of the tumour pairs were generally concordant between methylation profiling and aCGH. CONCLUSION: Our results show that DNA methylation profiling as well as aCGH have potential as diagnostic tools in improving the clinical decisions to differentiate recurrences from a second de novo tumour.

CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich carboxy-terminal domain 4 (CITED4) inhibits HIF-1alpha transactivation by binding to CBP/p300. We hypothesised that either somatic mutation or hypermethylation of the CITED4 gene underlies CITED4 down-regulation and thus enhanced HIF-1alpha expression in some breast tumours. DNA sequencing was used to screen for somatic mutations. Methylation-sensitive high resolution melting was performed to identify CITED4 methylation. RT-qPCR was carried out to measure the expression of CITED4 and selected HIF downstream targets. HIF-1alpha and downstream gene expression was assessed with immunohistochemistry. No somatic mutations of CITED4 were identified in 10 tumour cell lines and 100 breast carcinomas. However, CITED4 promoter methylation was identified in 5/168 breast carcinomas (four infiltrating ductal carcinomas and one infiltrating lobular carcinoma) and in 3/10 breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-453, MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T). CITED4 mRNA expression in cell lines was inversely correlated with DNA methylation. CITED4 mRNA expression was significantly increased in all three cell lines after 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (DAC) treatment. Treatment of the MDA-MB-231 cell line with DAC followed by hypoxia (0.1% O(2)) resulted in down-regulation of expression of the HIF-1alpha downstream genes VEGFA and SLC2A1 (P = 0.0029). HIF-1alpha downstream SLC2A1 was decreased (P = 0.021) after CITED4 was re-expressed under hypoxia. Loss of expression of CITED4 in breast cancer may be due to DNA methylation but is unlikely to be due to mutation. Demethylation and histone modification can potentially reactivate CITED4 gene expression in some breast cancers and lead to changes in tumour behaviour. Strategies such as HDAC inhibitors may overcome this effect.. CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich carboxy-terminal domain 4 (CITED4) inhibits HIF-1alpha transactivation by binding to CBP/p300. We hypothesised that either somatic mutation or hypermethylation of the CITED4 gene underlies CITED4 down-regulation and thus enhanced HIF-1alpha expression in some breast tumours. DNA sequencing was used to screen for somatic mutations. Methylation-sensitive high resolution melting was performed to identify CITED4 methylation. RT-qPCR was carried out to measure the expression of CITED4 and selected HIF downstream targets. HIF-1alpha and downstream gene expression was assessed with immunohistochemistry. No somatic mutations of CITED4 were identified in 10 tumour cell lines and 100 breast carcinomas. However, CITED4 promoter methylation was identified in 5/168 breast carcinomas (four infiltrating ductal carcinomas and one infiltrating lobular carcinoma) and in 3/10 breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-453, MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T). CITED4 mRNA expression in cell lines was inversely correlated with DNA methylation. CITED4 mRNA expression was significantly increased in all three cell lines after 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (DAC) treatment. Treatment of the MDA-MB-231 cell line with DAC followed by hypoxia (0.1% O(2)) resulted in down-regulation of expression of the HIF-1alpha downstream genes VEGFA and SLC2A1 (P = 0.0029). HIF-1alpha downstream SLC2A1 was decreased (P = 0.021) after CITED4 was re-expressed under hypoxia. Loss of expression of CITED4 in breast cancer may be due to DNA methylation but is unlikely to be due to mutation. Demethylation and histone modification can potentially reactivate CITED4 gene expression in some breast cancers and lead to changes in tumour behaviour. Strategies such as HDAC inhibitors may overcome this effect.

We have developed a PCR-based method, called methylation-sensitive restriction fingerprinting (MSRF), to screen changes in DNA methylation in breast carcinomas. Two hypermethylation-containing fragments, HBC-1 (for "hypermethylation in breast cancer") and HBC-2, were identified in the amplified breast tumor DNA relative to the amplified normal breast DNA of a patient. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed no significant matches between the sequence of HBC-1 and the known sequences in the GenBank database, whereas the sequence of HBC-2 matched the upstream region of an antisense WT1 (Wilms' tumor suppressor gene) promoter. The methylation status in the breast tumor DNA from this patient was confirmed by Southern hybridization using HBC-1 and HBC-2 as probes, respectively. Further analysis showed that HBC-1 was methylated aberrantly in 90% (17 of 19 patients) of the primary breast carcinomas examined. This study demonstrates that MSRF provides a useful means for screening aberrant changes in DNA methylation during tumorigenesis. The commonly methylated fragments identified by MSRF could potentially supplement pathological markers currently used for cancers and additionally lead to the discovery of novel methylated tumor suppressor genes.. We have developed a PCR-based method, called methylation-sensitive restriction fingerprinting (MSRF), to screen changes in DNA methylation in breast carcinomas. Two hypermethylation-containing fragments, HBC-1 (for "hypermethylation in breast cancer") and HBC-2, were identified in the amplified breast tumor DNA relative to the amplified normal breast DNA of a patient. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed no significant matches between the sequence of HBC-1 and the known sequences in the GenBank database, whereas the sequence of HBC-2 matched the upstream region of an antisense WT1 (Wilms' tumor suppressor gene) promoter. The methylation status in the breast tumor DNA from this patient was confirmed by Southern hybridization using HBC-1 and HBC-2 as probes, respectively. Further analysis showed that HBC-1 was methylated aberrantly in 90% (17 of 19 patients) of the primary breast carcinomas examined. This study demonstrates that MSRF provides a useful means for screening aberrant changes in DNA methylation during tumorigenesis. The commonly methylated fragments identified by MSRF could potentially supplement pathological markers currently used for cancers and additionally lead to the discovery of novel methylated tumor suppressor genes.

CpG island hypermethylation is known to be associated with gene silencing in cancer. This epigenetic event is generally accepted as a stochastic process in tumor cells resulting from aberrant DNA methyltransferase (DNA-MTase) activities. Specific patterns of CpG island methylation could result from clonal selection of cells having growth advantages due to silencing of associated tumor suppressor genes. Alternatively, methylation patterns may be determined by other, as yet unidentified factors. To explore further the underlying mechanisms, we developed a novel array-based method, called differential methylation hybridization (DMH), which allows a genome-wide screening of hypermethylated CpG islands in tumor cells. DMH was used to determine the methylation status of >276 CpG island loci in a group of breast cancer cell lines. Between 5 and 14% of these loci were hypermethylated extensively in these cells relative to a normal control. Pattern analysis of 30 positive loci by Southern hybridization indicated that CpG islands might differ in their susceptibility to hypermethylation. Loci exhibiting pre-existing methylation in normal controls were more susceptible to de novo methylation in these cancer cells than loci without this condition. In addition, these cell lines exhibited different intrinsic abilities to methylate CpG islands not directly associated with methyltransferase activities. Our study provides evidence that, aside from random DNA-MTase action, additional cellular factors exist that govern aberrant methylation in breast cancer cells.. CpG island hypermethylation is known to be associated with gene silencing in cancer. This epigenetic event is generally accepted as a stochastic process in tumor cells resulting from aberrant DNA methyltransferase (DNA-MTase) activities. Specific patterns of CpG island methylation could result from clonal selection of cells having growth advantages due to silencing of associated tumor suppressor genes. Alternatively, methylation patterns may be determined by other, as yet unidentified factors. To explore further the underlying mechanisms, we developed a novel array-based method, called differential methylation hybridization (DMH), which allows a genome-wide screening of hypermethylated CpG islands in tumor cells. DMH was used to determine the methylation status of >276 CpG island loci in a group of breast cancer cell lines. Between 5 and 14% of these loci were hypermethylated extensively in these cells relative to a normal control. Pattern analysis of 30 positive loci by Southern hybridization indicated that CpG islands might differ in their susceptibility to hypermethylation. Loci exhibiting pre-existing methylation in normal controls were more susceptible to de novo methylation in these cancer cells than loci without this condition. In addition, these cell lines exhibited different intrinsic abilities to methylate CpG islands not directly associated with methyltransferase activities. Our study provides evidence that, aside from random DNA-MTase action, additional cellular factors exist that govern aberrant methylation in breast cancer cells.

BACKGROUND: Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Receptor-type O (PTPRO) has recently been in the spotlight as a tumor suppressor, whose encoding gene is frequently methylated in cancers. We examined the methylation status of the PTPRO gene promoter in breast cancer and evaluated the correlation between PTPRO promoter methylation and both clinicopathological parameters and prognosis of breast cancer patients. METHODS: Two hundred twenty-one formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues, 20 FFPE normal adjacent tissues and 24 matched plasma samples, collected from primary breast cancer patients, were assessed for PTPRO gene promoter methylation using methylation-specific PCR. Associations of promoter methylation with clinicopathological parameters were evaluated. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the effect on survival. RESULTS: 175 samples gave identifiable PCR products, of which 130 cases (74.3%) had PTPRO gene promoter methylation. PTPRO methylation correlated with higher histological grade (P = 0.028), but not other clinical parameters. Multivariate analysis indicated that overall survival (OS) was significantly poorer in HER2-positive, but not ER-positive patients with methylated-PTPRO. Methylated-PTPRO was detectable in matched plasma samples and only observed in plasma from patients whose corresponding primary tumors were also methylated. CONCLUSIONS: PTPRO methylation is a common event in the primary breast cancer and can be reliably detected in peripheral blood samples. PTPRO methylation is associated with poor survival only in HER2-positive patients, suggesting use of PTPRO methylation as a prognostic factor for breast cancer and for optimizing individualized therapy for HER2-positive patients.. BACKGROUND: Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Receptor-type O (PTPRO) has recently been in the spotlight as a tumor suppressor, whose encoding gene is frequently methylated in cancers. We examined the methylation status of the PTPRO gene promoter in breast cancer and evaluated the correlation between PTPRO promoter methylation and both clinicopathological parameters and prognosis of breast cancer patients. METHODS: Two hundred twenty-one formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues, 20 FFPE normal adjacent tissues and 24 matched plasma samples, collected from primary breast cancer patients, were assessed for PTPRO gene promoter methylation using methylation-specific PCR. Associations of promoter methylation with clinicopathological parameters were evaluated. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the effect on survival. RESULTS: 175 samples gave identifiable PCR products, of which 130 cases (74.3%) had PTPRO gene promoter methylation. PTPRO methylation correlated with higher histological grade (P = 0.028), but not other clinical parameters. Multivariate analysis indicated that overall survival (OS) was significantly poorer in HER2-positive, but not ER-positive patients with methylated-PTPRO. Methylated-PTPRO was detectable in matched plasma samples and only observed in plasma from patients whose corresponding primary tumors were also methylated. CONCLUSIONS: PTPRO methylation is a common event in the primary breast cancer and can be reliably detected in peripheral blood samples. PTPRO methylation is associated with poor survival only in HER2-positive patients, suggesting use of PTPRO methylation as a prognostic factor for breast cancer and for optimizing individualized therapy for HER2-positive patients.

Frequent deletions or mutations of the INK4 gene, which encodes the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 inhibitor p16INK4a, have been documented in various human cancers, but little is known about the role of this tumor suppressor gene in primary breast cancer. We examined p16INK4a mRNA expression and its relationship with cyclin D1 and estrogen receptor (ER) expression in 314 primary breast cancers using Northern blots probed with a p16 exon 1alpha-specific cDNA. Tumor samples overexpressing p16INK4a were predominantly ER negative with low levels of cyclin D1. Cyclin D1 and ER mRNA levels in the high p16INK4a expressers were significantly lower than those in the remainder of the population (P = 0.0001). Furthermore, the mean p16INK4a mRNA level in the ER-negative tumors was significantly higher than that in the ER-positive group (P = 0.0001). Because the INK4 gene is frequently inactivated by de novo methylation, we investigated the frequency of INK4a exon 1alpha methylation in a subset of 120 primary breast cancers using methylation-specific PCR; 24 of these were methylated. These findings indicate that high expression of p16INK4a and reduced expression due to de novo INK4a methylation are frequent events in primary breast cancer. In a subset of 217 patients for whom detailed clinical data were available, high p16INK4a mRNA expression was associated with high tumor grade (P = 0.006), > or = 4 axillary lymph node involvement (P = 0.004), ER negativity (P = 0.0001), and increased risk of relapse (P = 0.006). The significant negative correlation between p16INK4a and ER gene expression raises issues regarding their functional interrelationships and whether high p16INK4a expression may be associated with a lack of hormone responsiveness in breast cancer.. Frequent deletions or mutations of the INK4 gene, which encodes the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 inhibitor p16INK4a, have been documented in various human cancers, but little is known about the role of this tumor suppressor gene in primary breast cancer. We examined p16INK4a mRNA expression and its relationship with cyclin D1 and estrogen receptor (ER) expression in 314 primary breast cancers using Northern blots probed with a p16 exon 1alpha-specific cDNA. Tumor samples overexpressing p16INK4a were predominantly ER negative with low levels of cyclin D1. Cyclin D1 and ER mRNA levels in the high p16INK4a expressers were significantly lower than those in the remainder of the population (P = 0.0001). Furthermore, the mean p16INK4a mRNA level in the ER-negative tumors was significantly higher than that in the ER-positive group (P = 0.0001). Because the INK4 gene is frequently inactivated by de novo methylation, we investigated the frequency of INK4a exon 1alpha methylation in a subset of 120 primary breast cancers using methylation-specific PCR; 24 of these were methylated. These findings indicate that high expression of p16INK4a and reduced expression due to de novo INK4a methylation are frequent events in primary breast cancer. In a subset of 217 patients for whom detailed clinical data were available, high p16INK4a mRNA expression was associated with high tumor grade (P = 0.006), > or = 4 axillary lymph node involvement (P = 0.004), ER negativity (P = 0.0001), and increased risk of relapse (P = 0.006). The significant negative correlation between p16INK4a and ER gene expression raises issues regarding their functional interrelationships and whether high p16INK4a expression may be associated with a lack of hormone responsiveness in breast cancer.

Prolonged exposure to high level of estrogen is a known risk factor for breast carcinogenesis. In cells, estrogens, in particular estrone (E1) and 17 beta-estradiol (E2), can be converted to catecholestrogens (CEs) which may be oxidized to form CE-semiquinones and CE-quinones that are capable of binding to DNA to induce mutations, followed by carcinogenesis. Whether the body is equipped with protective mechanisms against potentially harmful CEs, therefore, is an important issue. The present study was designed to examine the role of sulfation in the metabolism of CEs. MCF-7 breast cancer cells and MCF 10A human mammary epithelial cells were metabolically labeled with [35S]sulfate in the presence of individual CEs. Analysis of the labeling media showed the generation and release of exclusively [35S]sulfated 2-methoxy-E1 or [35S]sulfated 2- or 4-methoxy-E2 by cells labeled in the presence of 2-OH-E1 or 2- or 4-OH-E2. Whereas both [35S]sulfated 4-methoxy-E1 and [35S]sulfated 4-OH-E1 were detected in the labeling media of cells labeled in the presence of 4-OH-E1. These results indicated a concerted action of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and the cytosolic sulfotransferase (SULT) enzyme(s) in the metabolism of CEs. Enzymatic assays revealed that, five (SULT1A1, SULT1A2, SULT1A3, SULT1C4, and SULT1E1) of eleven known human SULTs tested could use CEs and methoxyestrogens (MEs) as substrates, with SULT1E1 displaying the strongest sulfating activity.. Prolonged exposure to high level of estrogen is a known risk factor for breast carcinogenesis. In cells, estrogens, in particular estrone (E1) and 17 beta-estradiol (E2), can be converted to catecholestrogens (CEs) which may be oxidized to form CE-semiquinones and CE-quinones that are capable of binding to DNA to induce mutations, followed by carcinogenesis. Whether the body is equipped with protective mechanisms against potentially harmful CEs, therefore, is an important issue. The present study was designed to examine the role of sulfation in the metabolism of CEs. MCF-7 breast cancer cells and MCF 10A human mammary epithelial cells were metabolically labeled with [35S]sulfate in the presence of individual CEs. Analysis of the labeling media showed the generation and release of exclusively [35S]sulfated 2-methoxy-E1 or [35S]sulfated 2- or 4-methoxy-E2 by cells labeled in the presence of 2-OH-E1 or 2- or 4-OH-E2. Whereas both [35S]sulfated 4-methoxy-E1 and [35S]sulfated 4-OH-E1 were detected in the labeling media of cells labeled in the presence of 4-OH-E1. These results indicated a concerted action of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and the cytosolic sulfotransferase (SULT) enzyme(s) in the metabolism of CEs. Enzymatic assays revealed that, five (SULT1A1, SULT1A2, SULT1A3, SULT1C4, and SULT1E1) of eleven known human SULTs tested could use CEs and methoxyestrogens (MEs) as substrates, with SULT1E1 displaying the strongest sulfating activity.

Estimation of the cancer cell fraction in breast cancer tissue is important for exclusion of samples unsuitable for multigene prognostic assays and a variety of molecular analyses for research. Here, we aimed to establish a breast cancer cell fraction marker based on DNA methylation. First, we screened genes unmethylated in non-cancerous mammary tissues and methylated in breast cancer tissues using microarray data from the TCGA database, and isolated 12 genes. Among them, four genes were selected as candidate marker genes without a high incidence of copy number alterations and with broad coverage across patients. Bisulfite pyrosequencing analysis of additional breast cancer biopsy specimens purified by laser capture microdissection (LCM) excluded two genes, and a combination of SIM1 and CCDC181 was finally selected as a fraction marker. In further additional specimens without LCM purification, the fraction marker was substantially methylated (>/= 20%) with high incidence (50/51). The cancer cell fraction estimated by the fraction marker was significantly correlated with that estimated by microscopic examination (p < 0.0001). Performance of a previously established marker, HSD17B4 methylation, which predicts therapeutic response of HER2-positive breast cancer to trastuzumab, was improved after the correction of cancer cell fraction by the fraction marker. In conclusion, we successfully established a breast cancer cell fraction marker based on DNA methylation.. Estimation of the cancer cell fraction in breast cancer tissue is important for exclusion of samples unsuitable for multigene prognostic assays and a variety of molecular analyses for research. Here, we aimed to establish a breast cancer cell fraction marker based on DNA methylation. First, we screened genes unmethylated in non-cancerous mammary tissues and methylated in breast cancer tissues using microarray data from the TCGA database, and isolated 12 genes. Among them, four genes were selected as candidate marker genes without a high incidence of copy number alterations and with broad coverage across patients. Bisulfite pyrosequencing analysis of additional breast cancer biopsy specimens purified by laser capture microdissection (LCM) excluded two genes, and a combination of SIM1 and CCDC181 was finally selected as a fraction marker. In further additional specimens without LCM purification, the fraction marker was substantially methylated (>/= 20%) with high incidence (50/51). The cancer cell fraction estimated by the fraction marker was significantly correlated with that estimated by microscopic examination (p < 0.0001). Performance of a previously established marker, HSD17B4 methylation, which predicts therapeutic response of HER2-positive breast cancer to trastuzumab, was improved after the correction of cancer cell fraction by the fraction marker. In conclusion, we successfully established a breast cancer cell fraction marker based on DNA methylation.

BRCA1 promoter methylation reportedly plays an important part in the pathogenesis of human breast cancer. In the present study, we investigated whether or not BRCA1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood cells (PBCs) can serve as a risk factor for developing breast cancer. The association of BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs with breast cancer risk was examined in a case-control study (200 breast cancer patients and 200 controls). BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs and breast tumors was determined with a methylation-specific quantitative PCR assay. BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs was seen in 43 (21.5%) of the breast cancer patients and in 27 (13.5%) of the controls. The odds ratio for breast cancer adjusted for other epidemiological risk factors was 1.73 (1.01-2.96) and was statistically significant (P = 0.045). When breast tumors were classified into those with and without BRCA1 promoter methylation, the odds ratio was 0.84 (0.43-1.64) (P = 0.61) for BRCA1 promoter methylation-negative and 17.78 (6.71-47.13) (P < 0.001) for BRCA1 promoter methylation-positive breast tumors. BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs is significantly associated with risk of breast cancer with BRCA1 promoter methylation. This seems to indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs may constitute a novel risk factor for breast cancer with BRCA1 promoter methylation.. BRCA1 promoter methylation reportedly plays an important part in the pathogenesis of human breast cancer. In the present study, we investigated whether or not BRCA1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood cells (PBCs) can serve as a risk factor for developing breast cancer. The association of BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs with breast cancer risk was examined in a case-control study (200 breast cancer patients and 200 controls). BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs and breast tumors was determined with a methylation-specific quantitative PCR assay. BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs was seen in 43 (21.5%) of the breast cancer patients and in 27 (13.5%) of the controls. The odds ratio for breast cancer adjusted for other epidemiological risk factors was 1.73 (1.01-2.96) and was statistically significant (P = 0.045). When breast tumors were classified into those with and without BRCA1 promoter methylation, the odds ratio was 0.84 (0.43-1.64) (P = 0.61) for BRCA1 promoter methylation-negative and 17.78 (6.71-47.13) (P < 0.001) for BRCA1 promoter methylation-positive breast tumors. BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs is significantly associated with risk of breast cancer with BRCA1 promoter methylation. This seems to indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation in PBCs may constitute a novel risk factor for breast cancer with BRCA1 promoter methylation.

Oestrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha) gene has two specific promoters, distal (P0) and proximal (P1), which induce almost identical transcripts in size due to different splicing. We examined the methylation at both promoter regions of the ER-alpha gene using HpaII, a methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme, prior to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. To confirm the results of PCR-based methylation analysis, Southern hybridization was also performed. Twenty of 29 patients with ER-alpha-positive tumours and five of 27 with ER-alpha-negative tumours were unmethylated at the P1 promoter region of the ER-alpha gene. The incidence of methylation was highly negatively correlated with ER-alpha expression (P = 0.0002). A similarly negative correlation was observed at the P0 promoter region of the ER-alpha gene (P = 0.0154). Additionally, the tumours with the ER-alpha gene hypermethylated at both promoter regions had definitely negative ER-alpha values. It was suggested that this epigenetic change might control ER-alpha expression, and might play an important role in the loss of hormone-dependence in breast cancer.. Oestrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha) gene has two specific promoters, distal (P0) and proximal (P1), which induce almost identical transcripts in size due to different splicing. We examined the methylation at both promoter regions of the ER-alpha gene using HpaII, a methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme, prior to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. To confirm the results of PCR-based methylation analysis, Southern hybridization was also performed. Twenty of 29 patients with ER-alpha-positive tumours and five of 27 with ER-alpha-negative tumours were unmethylated at the P1 promoter region of the ER-alpha gene. The incidence of methylation was highly negatively correlated with ER-alpha expression (P = 0.0002). A similarly negative correlation was observed at the P0 promoter region of the ER-alpha gene (P = 0.0154). Additionally, the tumours with the ER-alpha gene hypermethylated at both promoter regions had definitely negative ER-alpha values. It was suggested that this epigenetic change might control ER-alpha expression, and might play an important role in the loss of hormone-dependence in breast cancer.

Breast cancer is a prevalent heterogeneous malignant disease. Gene expression profiling by DNA microarray can classify breast tumors into five different molecular subtypes: luminal A, luminal B, HER-2, basal and normal- like which have differing prognosis. Recently it has been shown that immunohistochemistry (IHC) markers including estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2), can divide tumors to main subtypes: luminal A (ER+; PR+/-; HER-2-), luminal B (ER+;PR+/-; HER-2+), basal-like (ER-;PR-;HER2-) and Her2+ (ER-; PR-; HER-2+). Some subtypes such as basal-like subtype have been characterized by poor prognosis and reduced overall survival. Due to the importance of the ER signaling pathway in mammary cell proliferation; it appears that epigenetic changes in the ERalpha gene as a central component of this pathway, may contribute to prognostic prediction. Thus this study aimed to clarify the correlation of different IHC-based subtypes of breast tumors with ERalpha methylation in Iranian breast cancer patients. For this purpose one hundred fresh breast tumors obtained by surgical resection underwent DNA extraction for assessment of their ER methylation status by methylation specific PCR (MSP). These tumors were classified into main subtypes according to IHC markers and data were collected on pathological features of the patients. ERalpha methylation was found in 25 of 28 (89.3%) basal tumors, 21 of 24 (87.5%) Her2+ tumors, 18 of 34 (52.9%) luminal A tumors and 7 of 14 (50%) luminal B tumors. A strong correlation was found between ERalpha methylation and poor prognosis tumor subtypes (basal and Her2+) in patients (P<0.001). Our findings show that ERalpha methylation is correlated with poor prognosis subtypes of breast tumors in Iranian patients and may play an important role in pathogenesis of the more aggressive breast tumors.. Breast cancer is a prevalent heterogeneous malignant disease. Gene expression profiling by DNA microarray can classify breast tumors into five different molecular subtypes: luminal A, luminal B, HER-2, basal and normal- like which have differing prognosis. Recently it has been shown that immunohistochemistry (IHC) markers including estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2), can divide tumors to main subtypes: luminal A (ER+; PR+/-; HER-2-), luminal B (ER+;PR+/-; HER-2+), basal-like (ER-;PR-;HER2-) and Her2+ (ER-; PR-; HER-2+). Some subtypes such as basal-like subtype have been characterized by poor prognosis and reduced overall survival. Due to the importance of the ER signaling pathway in mammary cell proliferation; it appears that epigenetic changes in the ERalpha gene as a central component of this pathway, may contribute to prognostic prediction. Thus this study aimed to clarify the correlation of different IHC-based subtypes of breast tumors with ERalpha methylation in Iranian breast cancer patients. For this purpose one hundred fresh breast tumors obtained by surgical resection underwent DNA extraction for assessment of their ER methylation status by methylation specific PCR (MSP). These tumors were classified into main subtypes according to IHC markers and data were collected on pathological features of the patients. ERalpha methylation was found in 25 of 28 (89.3%) basal tumors, 21 of 24 (87.5%) Her2+ tumors, 18 of 34 (52.9%) luminal A tumors and 7 of 14 (50%) luminal B tumors. A strong correlation was found between ERalpha methylation and poor prognosis tumor subtypes (basal and Her2+) in patients (P<0.001). Our findings show that ERalpha methylation is correlated with poor prognosis subtypes of breast tumors in Iranian patients and may play an important role in pathogenesis of the more aggressive breast tumors.

Early postnatal exposures to Bisphenol A (BPA) and genistein (GEN) have been reported to predispose for and against mammary cancer, respectively, in adult rats. Since the changes in cancer susceptibility occurs in the absence of the original chemical exposure, we have investigated the potential of epigenetics to account for these changes. DNA methylation studies reveal that prepubertal BPA exposure alters signaling pathways that contribute to carcinogenesis. Prepubertal exposure to GEN and BPA + GEN revealed pathways involved in maintenance of cellular function, indicating that the presence of GEN either reduces or counters some of the alterations caused by the carcinogenic properties of BPA. We subsequently evaluated the potential of epigenetic changes in the rat mammary tissues to predict survival in breast cancer patients via the Cancer Genomic Atlas (TCGA). We identified 12 genes that showed strong predictive values for long-term survival in estrogen receptor positive patients. Importantly, two genes associated with improved long term survival, HPSE and RPS9, were identified to be hypomethylated in mammary glands of rats exposed prepuberally to GEN or to GEN + BPA respectively, reinforcing the suggested cancer suppressive properties of GEN.. Early postnatal exposures to Bisphenol A (BPA) and genistein (GEN) have been reported to predispose for and against mammary cancer, respectively, in adult rats. Since the changes in cancer susceptibility occurs in the absence of the original chemical exposure, we have investigated the potential of epigenetics to account for these changes. DNA methylation studies reveal that prepubertal BPA exposure alters signaling pathways that contribute to carcinogenesis. Prepubertal exposure to GEN and BPA + GEN revealed pathways involved in maintenance of cellular function, indicating that the presence of GEN either reduces or counters some of the alterations caused by the carcinogenic properties of BPA. We subsequently evaluated the potential of epigenetic changes in the rat mammary tissues to predict survival in breast cancer patients via the Cancer Genomic Atlas (TCGA). We identified 12 genes that showed strong predictive values for long-term survival in estrogen receptor positive patients. Importantly, two genes associated with improved long term survival, HPSE and RPS9, were identified to be hypomethylated in mammary glands of rats exposed prepuberally to GEN or to GEN + BPA respectively, reinforcing the suggested cancer suppressive properties of GEN.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide analysis has shown that DNA methylation spans long stretches of chromosome regions consisting of clusters of contiguous CpG islands or gene families. Hypermethylation of various gene clusters has been reported in many types of cancer. In this study, we conducted methyl-binding domain capture (MBDCap) sequencing (MBD-seq) analysis on a breast cancer cohort consisting of 77 patients and 10 normal controls, as well as a panel of 38 breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis determined seven gene clusters with a significant difference in overall survival (OS) and further revealed a distinct feature that the conservation of a large gene cluster (approximately 70 kb) metallothionein-1 (MT1) among 45 species is much lower than the average of all RefSeq genes. Furthermore, we found that DNA methylation is an important epigenetic regulator contributing to gene repression of MT1 gene cluster in both ERalpha positive (ERalpha+) and ERalpha negative (ERalpha-) breast tumors. In silico analysis revealed much lower gene expression of this cluster in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort for ERalpha + tumors. To further investigate the role of estrogen, we conducted 17beta-estradiol (E2) and demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC) treatment in various breast cancer cell types. Cell proliferation and invasion assays suggested MT1F and MT1M may play an anti-oncogenic role in breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that DNA methylation in large contiguous gene clusters can be potential prognostic markers of breast cancer. Further investigation of these clusters revealed that estrogen mediates epigenetic repression of MT1 cluster in ERalpha + breast cancer cell lines. In all, our studies identify thousands of breast tumor hypermethylated regions for the first time, in particular, discovering seven large contiguous hypermethylated gene clusters.. BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide analysis has shown that DNA methylation spans long stretches of chromosome regions consisting of clusters of contiguous CpG islands or gene families. Hypermethylation of various gene clusters has been reported in many types of cancer. In this study, we conducted methyl-binding domain capture (MBDCap) sequencing (MBD-seq) analysis on a breast cancer cohort consisting of 77 patients and 10 normal controls, as well as a panel of 38 breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis determined seven gene clusters with a significant difference in overall survival (OS) and further revealed a distinct feature that the conservation of a large gene cluster (approximately 70 kb) metallothionein-1 (MT1) among 45 species is much lower than the average of all RefSeq genes. Furthermore, we found that DNA methylation is an important epigenetic regulator contributing to gene repression of MT1 gene cluster in both ERalpha positive (ERalpha+) and ERalpha negative (ERalpha-) breast tumors. In silico analysis revealed much lower gene expression of this cluster in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort for ERalpha + tumors. To further investigate the role of estrogen, we conducted 17beta-estradiol (E2) and demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC) treatment in various breast cancer cell types. Cell proliferation and invasion assays suggested MT1F and MT1M may play an anti-oncogenic role in breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that DNA methylation in large contiguous gene clusters can be potential prognostic markers of breast cancer. Further investigation of these clusters revealed that estrogen mediates epigenetic repression of MT1 cluster in ERalpha + breast cancer cell lines. In all, our studies identify thousands of breast tumor hypermethylated regions for the first time, in particular, discovering seven large contiguous hypermethylated gene clusters.

Tamoxifen is a standard anti-hormone treatment in estrogen receptor positive breast carcinoma patients. Unfortunately, about 50% of patients relapse during treatment. Promoter hypermethylation contributes to the epigenetic modulation of tamoxifen resistance-related genes. To evaluate the contribution of DNMTs expression and their promoter methylation as diagnostic biomarkers in development of breast malignancy and tamoxifen resistance, the present study was designed and 107 breast tumors and normal breast tissues were recruited. Methylation-specific high-resolution melt curve analysis and quantitative RT-PCR were performed to evaluate DNMTs promoter methylation and mRNA expression, respectively. Our results indicated that DNMT3A and DNMT3B promoters were demethylated in breast tumors as compared to control tissues. The mRNA expression levels of all three DNMTs were significantly increased in tumor specimens in comparison to control tissues (p < 0.05). Among tumor tissues, DNMT3A promoter methylation was significantly higher in tamoxifen sensitive patients (p = 0.001). Overexpression of DNMT3A (p = 0.037) and DNMT3B (p < 0.001) mRNA were observed in tamoxifen resistance group. Multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that low methylation status of DNMT3A and overexpression of DNMT3B could be as independent predictors of disease recurrence. Multivariate Cox regression analysis, revealed that high methylation status of DNMT3A could be an independent and favorable predictor for disease free survival (p = 0.002) and overall survival (p = 0.026); high expression of DNMT1 (p = 0.03) remained significant and unfavorable predictive factor for overall survival. In conclusion, our data for the first time indicated that low methylation status of DNMT3A promoter and overexpression of DNMT3B could contribute to disease recurrence in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients.. Tamoxifen is a standard anti-hormone treatment in estrogen receptor positive breast carcinoma patients. Unfortunately, about 50% of patients relapse during treatment. Promoter hypermethylation contributes to the epigenetic modulation of tamoxifen resistance-related genes. To evaluate the contribution of DNMTs expression and their promoter methylation as diagnostic biomarkers in development of breast malignancy and tamoxifen resistance, the present study was designed and 107 breast tumors and normal breast tissues were recruited. Methylation-specific high-resolution melt curve analysis and quantitative RT-PCR were performed to evaluate DNMTs promoter methylation and mRNA expression, respectively. Our results indicated that DNMT3A and DNMT3B promoters were demethylated in breast tumors as compared to control tissues. The mRNA expression levels of all three DNMTs were significantly increased in tumor specimens in comparison to control tissues (p < 0.05). Among tumor tissues, DNMT3A promoter methylation was significantly higher in tamoxifen sensitive patients (p = 0.001). Overexpression of DNMT3A (p = 0.037) and DNMT3B (p < 0.001) mRNA were observed in tamoxifen resistance group. Multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that low methylation status of DNMT3A and overexpression of DNMT3B could be as independent predictors of disease recurrence. Multivariate Cox regression analysis, revealed that high methylation status of DNMT3A could be an independent and favorable predictor for disease free survival (p = 0.002) and overall survival (p = 0.026); high expression of DNMT1 (p = 0.03) remained significant and unfavorable predictive factor for overall survival. In conclusion, our data for the first time indicated that low methylation status of DNMT3A promoter and overexpression of DNMT3B could contribute to disease recurrence in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients.

. 
BACKGROUND: The nuclear transcription factor estrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha) is the target of several antiestrogen therapeutic agents for breast cancer. However, many ER-alpha positive patients do not respond to these treatments from the beginning, or stop responding after being treated for a period of time. Because of the association of gene transcription alteration and drug resistance and the emerging evidence on the role of DNA methylation on transcription regulation, understanding of these relationships can facilitate development of approaches to re-sensitize breast cancer cells to treatment by restoring DNA methylation patterns. METHODS: We constructed a hierarchical empirical Bayes model to investigate the simultaneous change of gene expression and promoter DNA methylation profiles among wild type (WT) and OHT/ICI resistant MCF7 breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: We found that compared with the WT cell lines, almost all of the genes in OHT or ICI resistant cell lines either do not show methylation change or hypomethylated. Moreover, the correlations between gene expression and methylation are quite heterogeneous across genes, suggesting the involvement of other factors in regulating transcription. Analysis of our results in combination with H3K4me2 data on OHT resistant cell lines suggests a clear interplay between DNA methylation and H3K4me2 in the regulation of gene expression. For hypomethylated genes with alteration of gene expression, most (~80%) are up-regulated, consistent with current view on the relationship between promoter methylation and gene expression. CONCLUSIONS: We developed an empirical Bayes model to study the association between DNA methylation in the promoter region and gene expression. Our approach generates both global (across all genes) and local (individual gene) views of the interplay. It provides important insight on future effort to develop therapeutic agent to re-sensitize breast cancer cells to treatment.. BACKGROUND: The nuclear transcription factor estrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha) is the target of several antiestrogen therapeutic agents for breast cancer. However, many ER-alpha positive patients do not respond to these treatments from the beginning, or stop responding after being treated for a period of time. Because of the association of gene transcription alteration and drug resistance and the emerging evidence on the role of DNA methylation on transcription regulation, understanding of these relationships can facilitate development of approaches to re-sensitize breast cancer cells to treatment by restoring DNA methylation patterns. METHODS: We constructed a hierarchical empirical Bayes model to investigate the simultaneous change of gene expression and promoter DNA methylation profiles among wild type (WT) and OHT/ICI resistant MCF7 breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: We found that compared with the WT cell lines, almost all of the genes in OHT or ICI resistant cell lines either do not show methylation change or hypomethylated. Moreover, the correlations between gene expression and methylation are quite heterogeneous across genes, suggesting the involvement of other factors in regulating transcription. Analysis of our results in combination with H3K4me2 data on OHT resistant cell lines suggests a clear interplay between DNA methylation and H3K4me2 in the regulation of gene expression. For hypomethylated genes with alteration of gene expression, most (~80%) are up-regulated, consistent with current view on the relationship between promoter methylation and gene expression. CONCLUSIONS: We developed an empirical Bayes model to study the association between DNA methylation in the promoter region and gene expression. Our approach generates both global (across all genes) and local (individual gene) views of the interplay. It provides important insight on future effort to develop therapeutic agent to re-sensitize breast cancer cells to treatment.

Epigenetic analyses have shown that aberrant DNA methylation signatures are associated with breast cancer molecular subtypes. In this study, we analyzed the methylation status of breast cancer-related genes in relation to the molecular subtypes and investigated whether the basal-like subtype displays distinct methylation profiles. By using pyrosequencing, we analyzed the DNA methylation status of 5 candidate genes in 60 breast cancer samples. We compared the methylation frequency across the molecular subtypes and analyzed the correlation between methylation levels and clinicopathological characteristics. A total of 59 cases displayed aberrant methylation. Amplification during polymerase chain reaction analysis failed in 1 case. The median methylation levels of the secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) gene were significantly lower in the basal-like subtype compared to the luminal A, luminal B and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) subtypes. Cadherin 13 (H-cadherin; CDH13) methylation levels were significantly higher in the HER2 tumors compared to the luminal A and basal-like subtypes. A comparison of the methylation status with clinicopathological characteristics revealed that the expression of bcl-2, progesterone receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor were associated with SFRP1 gene methylation status. Our results indicate that the basal-like subtype is associated with low methylation levels of the SFRP1 gene, suggesting that the methylation levels of specific breast cancer genes may potentially serve as epigenetic biomarkers and prognostic factors.. Epigenetic analyses have shown that aberrant DNA methylation signatures are associated with breast cancer molecular subtypes. In this study, we analyzed the methylation status of breast cancer-related genes in relation to the molecular subtypes and investigated whether the basal-like subtype displays distinct methylation profiles. By using pyrosequencing, we analyzed the DNA methylation status of 5 candidate genes in 60 breast cancer samples. We compared the methylation frequency across the molecular subtypes and analyzed the correlation between methylation levels and clinicopathological characteristics. A total of 59 cases displayed aberrant methylation. Amplification during polymerase chain reaction analysis failed in 1 case. The median methylation levels of the secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) gene were significantly lower in the basal-like subtype compared to the luminal A, luminal B and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) subtypes. Cadherin 13 (H-cadherin; CDH13) methylation levels were significantly higher in the HER2 tumors compared to the luminal A and basal-like subtypes. A comparison of the methylation status with clinicopathological characteristics revealed that the expression of bcl-2, progesterone receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor were associated with SFRP1 gene methylation status. Our results indicate that the basal-like subtype is associated with low methylation levels of the SFRP1 gene, suggesting that the methylation levels of specific breast cancer genes may potentially serve as epigenetic biomarkers and prognostic factors.

Aberrant DNA methylation has been recognized to contribute to breast carcinogenesis, and promoter hypermethylation of several tumor suppressor genes has been correlated with decreased gene expression. The fragile histidine triad (FHIT) gene is a putative tumor suppressor gene in breast and other types of cancer, and loss of Fhit expression has been observed in breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the association between methylation of the FHIT gene and its expression in breast cancer, and to investigate whether methylation and expression of the FHIT gene correlates with clinicopathological characteristics in relation to human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status. Pyrosequencing of bisulfite-treated DNA was performed to study the methylation status of the FHIT gene in 60 breast cancer samples. We examined the expression of Fhit using tissue microarrays by immunohistochemical staining. FHIT methylation was detected in 96.7% and the positive expression rate of Fhit was 87.3% of the patients. The mean methylation level of the FHIT gene was associated with intratumoral inflammation. Methylation level of the FHIT gene had no significant differences according to molecular subtypes. Loss of Fhit expression was associated with large tumor size, basal-like subtype and positive expression of EGFR. In HER2-negative breast cancer, loss of Fhit expression was significantly associated with tumor size, estrogen receptor status and Ki-67 proliferation index. No significant correlation between methylation of the FHIT gene and its expression was observed in the present study. Our results suggest that loss of Fhit expression in breast cancer is associated with poor prognostic features, and it is also relevant to the results in HER2-negative breast cancer. Further studies with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up are required to clarify the predictive and prognostic value of Fhit expression and the FHIT gene methylation status in breast cancer.. Aberrant DNA methylation has been recognized to contribute to breast carcinogenesis, and promoter hypermethylation of several tumor suppressor genes has been correlated with decreased gene expression. The fragile histidine triad (FHIT) gene is a putative tumor suppressor gene in breast and other types of cancer, and loss of Fhit expression has been observed in breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the association between methylation of the FHIT gene and its expression in breast cancer, and to investigate whether methylation and expression of the FHIT gene correlates with clinicopathological characteristics in relation to human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) status. Pyrosequencing of bisulfite-treated DNA was performed to study the methylation status of the FHIT gene in 60 breast cancer samples. We examined the expression of Fhit using tissue microarrays by immunohistochemical staining. FHIT methylation was detected in 96.7% and the positive expression rate of Fhit was 87.3% of the patients. The mean methylation level of the FHIT gene was associated with intratumoral inflammation. Methylation level of the FHIT gene had no significant differences according to molecular subtypes. Loss of Fhit expression was associated with large tumor size, basal-like subtype and positive expression of EGFR. In HER2-negative breast cancer, loss of Fhit expression was significantly associated with tumor size, estrogen receptor status and Ki-67 proliferation index. No significant correlation between methylation of the FHIT gene and its expression was observed in the present study. Our results suggest that loss of Fhit expression in breast cancer is associated with poor prognostic features, and it is also relevant to the results in HER2-negative breast cancer. Further studies with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up are required to clarify the predictive and prognostic value of Fhit expression and the FHIT gene methylation status in breast cancer.

Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) has been implicated in tumorigenesis. In this study, we studied DNA methylation status of the ALCAM gene using pyrosequencing in breast cancer tissues. We analyzed the association between the methylation status of the ALCAM gene and its expression. Also, the effects of inflammation on the ALCAM gene methylation and its expression were investigated. The ALCAM gene methylation was associated with the ALCAM transcripts in tumor tissues. The methylation status of the ALCAM gene was not significantly different between tumor and normal tissues. The level of ALCAM transcripts was associated with the expression of TNFalpha, NF-kappaB p50, IL-4, and intratumoral inflammation. The IHC expression of ALCAM was associated with histologic grade, HER2 overexpression and molecular subtype. The expression of TNFalpha, NF-kappaB p50, and IL-4 showed significant association with the clinicopathologic characteristics. In conclusion, the ALCAM gene methylation was related to the level of ALCAM transcripts. Also, the level of ALCAM transcripts was associated with the inflammatory markers in breast cancer. Our results suggest that the methylation of the ALCAM gene contributes to the decreased expression of ALCAM. Also, ALCAM is linked to the inflammatory response in breast cancer.. Activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) has been implicated in tumorigenesis. In this study, we studied DNA methylation status of the ALCAM gene using pyrosequencing in breast cancer tissues. We analyzed the association between the methylation status of the ALCAM gene and its expression. Also, the effects of inflammation on the ALCAM gene methylation and its expression were investigated. The ALCAM gene methylation was associated with the ALCAM transcripts in tumor tissues. The methylation status of the ALCAM gene was not significantly different between tumor and normal tissues. The level of ALCAM transcripts was associated with the expression of TNFalpha, NF-kappaB p50, IL-4, and intratumoral inflammation. The IHC expression of ALCAM was associated with histologic grade, HER2 overexpression and molecular subtype. The expression of TNFalpha, NF-kappaB p50, and IL-4 showed significant association with the clinicopathologic characteristics. In conclusion, the ALCAM gene methylation was related to the level of ALCAM transcripts. Also, the level of ALCAM transcripts was associated with the inflammatory markers in breast cancer. Our results suggest that the methylation of the ALCAM gene contributes to the decreased expression of ALCAM. Also, ALCAM is linked to the inflammatory response in breast cancer.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease with very different responses to therapy and different length of survival. In many cases, however, the determination of the stage and histopathological characteristics of breast cancer is insufficient to predict prognosis and response to treatment for the vast heterogeneity of the disease. To understand the molecular signature of subtypes of breast cancer, we attempted to identify the methylation status of key tumour suppressor gene Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 isoform a (RASSF1A) and a member of the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor family which functions in left-right asymmetry development (PITX2) and to correlate results with known clinicopathological features of breast cancer. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues of breast carcinomas (n = 149) were used for DNA extraction. DNA was modified by bisulphite conversion. Detection of the methylation level of the genes mentioned above was performed by methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting assay (MS-HRM). Based on MS-HRM results for RASSF1A and PITX2, we subdivided the samples into four groups according to methylation level (</=50 % methylated, >50 % methylated, 100 % methylated and completely unmethylated alleles). All degrees of methylation status for both genes underwent analysis of dependence with known clinicopathological features, and we found significant associations. In 134 of 149 (89.9 %) primary breast carcinomas, the RASSF1A promoter was methylated. Total hypermethylation of PITX2 was observed in 60 of 135 (44.4 %) breast cancer cases. RASSF1A hypermethylation had significant association with increased age (p < 0.05), tumour grade (p < 0.0001) and stage (p < 0.0001) in the 100 % methylated group. There was significant association of PITX2 hypermethylation with tumour grade (p < 0.0001) and stage (p < 0.0001). Association between the methylation level of both investigated genes and tumour type was significant for ductal invasive carcinoma cases only (p < 0.0001). This study shows different levels of heterogeneous methylation acquired by MS-HRM assay of the promoter region of RASSF1A and PITX2 and its relationship with clinicopathological features of 149 breast cancer patients. We noticed that immunohistopathological subtypes of breast cancer contain distinct promoter methylation patterns. All these data suggest that hypermethylation of the CpG island promoters of RASSF1A and PITX2 might play an essential role in the very early stages of breast cancer pathogenesis.. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease with very different responses to therapy and different length of survival. In many cases, however, the determination of the stage and histopathological characteristics of breast cancer is insufficient to predict prognosis and response to treatment for the vast heterogeneity of the disease. To understand the molecular signature of subtypes of breast cancer, we attempted to identify the methylation status of key tumour suppressor gene Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 isoform a (RASSF1A) and a member of the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor family which functions in left-right asymmetry development (PITX2) and to correlate results with known clinicopathological features of breast cancer. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues of breast carcinomas (n = 149) were used for DNA extraction. DNA was modified by bisulphite conversion. Detection of the methylation level of the genes mentioned above was performed by methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting assay (MS-HRM). Based on MS-HRM results for RASSF1A and PITX2, we subdivided the samples into four groups according to methylation level (</=50 % methylated, >50 % methylated, 100 % methylated and completely unmethylated alleles). All degrees of methylation status for both genes underwent analysis of dependence with known clinicopathological features, and we found significant associations. In 134 of 149 (89.9 %) primary breast carcinomas, the RASSF1A promoter was methylated. Total hypermethylation of PITX2 was observed in 60 of 135 (44.4 %) breast cancer cases. RASSF1A hypermethylation had significant association with increased age (p < 0.05), tumour grade (p < 0.0001) and stage (p < 0.0001) in the 100 % methylated group. There was significant association of PITX2 hypermethylation with tumour grade (p < 0.0001) and stage (p < 0.0001). Association between the methylation level of both investigated genes and tumour type was significant for ductal invasive carcinoma cases only (p < 0.0001). This study shows different levels of heterogeneous methylation acquired by MS-HRM assay of the promoter region of RASSF1A and PITX2 and its relationship with clinicopathological features of 149 breast cancer patients. We noticed that immunohistopathological subtypes of breast cancer contain distinct promoter methylation patterns. All these data suggest that hypermethylation of the CpG island promoters of RASSF1A and PITX2 might play an essential role in the very early stages of breast cancer pathogenesis.

Hypermethylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. To gain insight into the epigenetic switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events during breast carcinogenesis, the present study focused on the DNA methylation profile of invasive breast carcinoma. The aim of the study was to evaluate the prognostic significance of Ras association domain family 1 isoform A (RASSF1A) promoter methylation status in operable breast cancer, and to analyze the utility of this biomarker regarding its association with metastatic and nonmetastatic axillary nodal status. For this purpose, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens from 116 breast cancer patients with known axillary nodal status were subjected to assessment of RASSF1A promoter methylation status by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) and methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting assay, and the results were subsequently validated by bisulfite sequencing. A multinomial logistic regression model was used to model the dependence of distinct levels of methylation status of the RASSF1A promoter on the nodal status. Promoter region CpG hypermethylation was identified by MSP in 97 (83.6%) of 116 primary breast tumors, while hypermethylation of RASSF1A was confirmed by MS-HRM in 107 (92.2%) of 116 cases of breast cancer. Based on the results of the multinomial logistic regression model, there was no significant difference between the frequency of RASSF1A promoter methylation and axillary lymph node status of patients in general. However, upon adjustment of pN stage, an association was identified between pN0 lymph node-negative status (without axillary metastases) and percentage of RASSF1A methylation in two groups of heterogeneous methylated alleles with </=50% methylated (P<0.05) and >50% methylated alleles (P<0.0001). If a patients' nodal status changes from pN- to pN+ then the risk of having >50% methylated alleles increases by 7%. The present study revealed a specific phenomenon, suggesting that the presence of heterogeneous methylated alleles in the RASSF1A gene is significantly associated with lymph node-negative status in breast cancer patients. Furthermore, greater significance with negative axillary nodal status was observed with a higher level of heterogeneous methylated alleles in the RASSF1A gene.. Hypermethylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. To gain insight into the epigenetic switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events during breast carcinogenesis, the present study focused on the DNA methylation profile of invasive breast carcinoma. The aim of the study was to evaluate the prognostic significance of Ras association domain family 1 isoform A (RASSF1A) promoter methylation status in operable breast cancer, and to analyze the utility of this biomarker regarding its association with metastatic and nonmetastatic axillary nodal status. For this purpose, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue specimens from 116 breast cancer patients with known axillary nodal status were subjected to assessment of RASSF1A promoter methylation status by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) and methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting assay, and the results were subsequently validated by bisulfite sequencing. A multinomial logistic regression model was used to model the dependence of distinct levels of methylation status of the RASSF1A promoter on the nodal status. Promoter region CpG hypermethylation was identified by MSP in 97 (83.6%) of 116 primary breast tumors, while hypermethylation of RASSF1A was confirmed by MS-HRM in 107 (92.2%) of 116 cases of breast cancer. Based on the results of the multinomial logistic regression model, there was no significant difference between the frequency of RASSF1A promoter methylation and axillary lymph node status of patients in general. However, upon adjustment of pN stage, an association was identified between pN0 lymph node-negative status (without axillary metastases) and percentage of RASSF1A methylation in two groups of heterogeneous methylated alleles with </=50% methylated (P<0.05) and >50% methylated alleles (P<0.0001). If a patients' nodal status changes from pN- to pN+ then the risk of having >50% methylated alleles increases by 7%. The present study revealed a specific phenomenon, suggesting that the presence of heterogeneous methylated alleles in the RASSF1A gene is significantly associated with lymph node-negative status in breast cancer patients. Furthermore, greater significance with negative axillary nodal status was observed with a higher level of heterogeneous methylated alleles in the RASSF1A gene.

Understanding the mechanisms that regulate the human pi class GST (GSTP1) gene expression in breast cancer cells is of particular importance to the study of breast cancer biology. In cultured human breast cancer cell lines, GSTP1 is exclusively expressed in estrogen receptor-negative (ER-) cells but is undetectable in receptor-positive (ER+) cells. Previously, we examined transiently transfected GSTP1 promoter activities, in vitro GSTP1 promoter-DNA interactions, and GSTP1 mRNA stability. These studies indicated that transiently transfected GSTP1 promoter elements and GSTP1 mRNA stability could only partially explain cell line-specific expression of endogenous GSTP1. In the present study, we examined whether the methylation status of the GSTP1 CpG island plays an important role in GSTP1 regulation. Southern blot analysis revealed that the GSTP1 CpG island is hypermethlyated in ER+, GSTP1 non-expressing cell lines but is undermethylated in ER-, GSTP1 expressing cell lines. Moreover, partial demethylation of the GSTP1 CpG island by treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in de novo gene expression in ER+ cell lines, as detected by RT-PCR, Northern blot and Western blot analyses. Our data strongly indicate that methylation status of the promoter contributes significantly to the levels of GSTP1 expressed in ER- and ER+ breast cancer cell lines.. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate the human pi class GST (GSTP1) gene expression in breast cancer cells is of particular importance to the study of breast cancer biology. In cultured human breast cancer cell lines, GSTP1 is exclusively expressed in estrogen receptor-negative (ER-) cells but is undetectable in receptor-positive (ER+) cells. Previously, we examined transiently transfected GSTP1 promoter activities, in vitro GSTP1 promoter-DNA interactions, and GSTP1 mRNA stability. These studies indicated that transiently transfected GSTP1 promoter elements and GSTP1 mRNA stability could only partially explain cell line-specific expression of endogenous GSTP1. In the present study, we examined whether the methylation status of the GSTP1 CpG island plays an important role in GSTP1 regulation. Southern blot analysis revealed that the GSTP1 CpG island is hypermethlyated in ER+, GSTP1 non-expressing cell lines but is undermethylated in ER-, GSTP1 expressing cell lines. Moreover, partial demethylation of the GSTP1 CpG island by treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in de novo gene expression in ER+ cell lines, as detected by RT-PCR, Northern blot and Western blot analyses. Our data strongly indicate that methylation status of the promoter contributes significantly to the levels of GSTP1 expressed in ER- and ER+ breast cancer cell lines.

Tumor suppressor genes are the key targets of hypermethylation in breast cancer and may therefore lead to malignancy by deregulation of cell growth and division. Our previous pilot study with pairs of malignant and normal breast tissues identified a correlation between RASSFIA gene methylation and breast cancer. To determine the relationship between RASSFIA methylation and breast cancer, we conducted a larger study. We took samples from 108 patients with breast cancer, 28 patients with benign breast tumors, and 33 subjects with normal breast tissues at the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University at Wuxi between July 2013 and September 2015. We used the samples to investigate methylation levels of the RASSF1A gene for associations with breast cancer. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and methylation-specific PCR were used to investigate the levels of RASSF1A mRNA expression and RASSF1A methylation, respectively. RASSFIA was not expressed in 22 of the 108 breast cancer tissue samples (20.37%), and there was no statistically significant difference (P > 0.05); however, RASSFIA expression was significantly lower than that in the normal breast tissue samples (P < 0.05). Moreover, the methylation rate of the RASSFIA gene promoter was significantly higher in the breast cancer tissues (64.81%) than in the normal breast tissues (18.18%) and benign breast tumors (17.86%) (P < 0.05). High methylation of the RASSF1A gene promoter was an important reason for its downregulation, and the gene played a critical regulated role in the incidence and development of breast cancer.. Tumor suppressor genes are the key targets of hypermethylation in breast cancer and may therefore lead to malignancy by deregulation of cell growth and division. Our previous pilot study with pairs of malignant and normal breast tissues identified a correlation between RASSFIA gene methylation and breast cancer. To determine the relationship between RASSFIA methylation and breast cancer, we conducted a larger study. We took samples from 108 patients with breast cancer, 28 patients with benign breast tumors, and 33 subjects with normal breast tissues at the Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University at Wuxi between July 2013 and September 2015. We used the samples to investigate methylation levels of the RASSF1A gene for associations with breast cancer. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and methylation-specific PCR were used to investigate the levels of RASSF1A mRNA expression and RASSF1A methylation, respectively. RASSFIA was not expressed in 22 of the 108 breast cancer tissue samples (20.37%), and there was no statistically significant difference (P > 0.05); however, RASSFIA expression was significantly lower than that in the normal breast tissue samples (P < 0.05). Moreover, the methylation rate of the RASSFIA gene promoter was significantly higher in the breast cancer tissues (64.81%) than in the normal breast tissues (18.18%) and benign breast tumors (17.86%) (P < 0.05). High methylation of the RASSF1A gene promoter was an important reason for its downregulation, and the gene played a critical regulated role in the incidence and development of breast cancer.

The retracted article is: Ji Y, Jin HH, Wang MD, Cao WX, et al. (2016). Methylation of the RASSFIA promoter in breast cancer. Genet. Mol. Res. 15: gmr.15028261. There are significant parts of this article (particularly, in the discussion section) that are copied from "Methylation of HIN-1, RASSF1A, RIL and CDH13 in breast cancer is associated with clinical characteristics, but only RASSF1A methylation is associated with outcome", by Jia Xu, Priya B Shetty, Weiwei Feng, Carol Chenault, Robert C Bast Jr, Jean-Pierre J Issa, Susan G Hilsenbeck and Yinhua Yu, published in BMC Cancer 2012; 12: 243. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-243. The first paragraphs of both discussions are identical. This is concerning. The abstract and introduction sections have much of their text plagiarized. Overall, there is high plagiarism detected. The GMR editorial staff was alerted and after a thorough investigation, we have strong reason to believe that the peer review process was failure and, after review and contacting the authors, the editors of Genetics and Molecular Research decided to retract the article in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE). The authors and their institutions were advised of this serious breach of ethics.. The retracted article is: Ji Y, Jin HH, Wang MD, Cao WX, et al. (2016). Methylation of the RASSFIA promoter in breast cancer. Genet. Mol. Res. 15: gmr.15028261. There are significant parts of this article (particularly, in the discussion section) that are copied from "Methylation of HIN-1, RASSF1A, RIL and CDH13 in breast cancer is associated with clinical characteristics, but only RASSF1A methylation is associated with outcome", by Jia Xu, Priya B Shetty, Weiwei Feng, Carol Chenault, Robert C Bast Jr, Jean-Pierre J Issa, Susan G Hilsenbeck and Yinhua Yu, published in BMC Cancer 2012; 12: 243. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-243. The first paragraphs of both discussions are identical. This is concerning. The abstract and introduction sections have much of their text plagiarized. Overall, there is high plagiarism detected. The GMR editorial staff was alerted and after a thorough investigation, we have strong reason to believe that the peer review process was failure and, after review and contacting the authors, the editors of Genetics and Molecular Research decided to retract the article in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE). The authors and their institutions were advised of this serious breach of ethics.

BACKGROUND: DAL-1 (Differentially Expressed in Adenocarcinoma of the Lung)/4.1B is a member of the protein 4.1 superfamily that has been shown to suppress growth in lung, breast and brain tumor cells. In the case of the caspase-3 deficient MCF-7 breast cancer cells, this growth suppression has been shown to be partially mediated by the induction of apoptosis. However the exact mechanism of action of DAL-1/4.1B is unknown. Recently, protein arginine N-methyltransferase 3 (PRMT3) was identified as a DAL-1/4.1B interacting protein. Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) posttranslationally methylate the arginine residues of proteins, a modification which has been implicated in the regulation of multiple cellular processes including nuclear-cytoplasmic transport, signal transduction, and transcription. RESULTS: To investigate the role of protein methylation in cell death induced by DAL-1/4.1B, DAL-1/4.1B-inducible MCF-7 cells were examined for apoptosis and caspase activation in the absence and presence of the protein methylation inhibitor adenosine dialdehyde (AdOX). Flow cytometry analysis revealed that apoptosis was primarily associated with the activation of caspase 8, and inhibition of this activation blocked the ability of DAL-1/4.1B to induce cell death. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that protein methylation cooperates with DAL-1/4.1B-associated caspase 8-specific activation to induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells.. BACKGROUND: DAL-1 (Differentially Expressed in Adenocarcinoma of the Lung)/4.1B is a member of the protein 4.1 superfamily that has been shown to suppress growth in lung, breast and brain tumor cells. In the case of the caspase-3 deficient MCF-7 breast cancer cells, this growth suppression has been shown to be partially mediated by the induction of apoptosis. However the exact mechanism of action of DAL-1/4.1B is unknown. Recently, protein arginine N-methyltransferase 3 (PRMT3) was identified as a DAL-1/4.1B interacting protein. Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) posttranslationally methylate the arginine residues of proteins, a modification which has been implicated in the regulation of multiple cellular processes including nuclear-cytoplasmic transport, signal transduction, and transcription. RESULTS: To investigate the role of protein methylation in cell death induced by DAL-1/4.1B, DAL-1/4.1B-inducible MCF-7 cells were examined for apoptosis and caspase activation in the absence and presence of the protein methylation inhibitor adenosine dialdehyde (AdOX). Flow cytometry analysis revealed that apoptosis was primarily associated with the activation of caspase 8, and inhibition of this activation blocked the ability of DAL-1/4.1B to induce cell death. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that protein methylation cooperates with DAL-1/4.1B-associated caspase 8-specific activation to induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells.

PURPOSE: The tuberous sclerosis (TSC) genes TSC1 and TSC2 encode the protein products hamartin and tuberin, respectively, and are putative tumour suppressor genes. Germ-line mutation of either TSC gene leads to the development of the heritable disorder TSC. This disorder is characterized by the development of hamartomas in many organs and is associated with the proliferative lung disease, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, the brain tumour giant cell astrocytoma and occasionally with renal cell carcinoma. However, the TSC genes have not been studied in breast cancer. The current study investigated the expression of the TSC gene products and the potential mechanisms of their aberrancy in human breast cancer cells and tissues. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: Using immunohistochemical analysis, both hamartin and tuberin were found to be strongly stained in normal mammary epithelial cells and weakly in stromal cells. In invasive tumour tissues, however, the staining of both proteins were to be markedly reduced (P < 0.01). At message level, although normal and tumour tissues expressed both TSC products, the transcript levels of tuberin was significantly lower in tumour tissues compared with normal tissues (P < 0.05). There was no statistical difference between node negative and node positive tumours with both hamartin and tuberin. Tumours from patients who developed recurrence and died from breast cancer had significantly low levels of tuberin compared with those who remained disease free (P = 0.03 and 0.05, respectively). Likewise, hamartin levels were significantly lower in patients with metastasis, recurrence and mortality, when compared with those remained disease free (P = 0.001, 0.041 and 0.003, respectively). Using methylation specific PCR, the TSC1 promoter was found to be heavily methylated in ZR751, MDA MB 435, and BT549, but not in MCF-7 which expressed highly level of hamartin. TSC1 promoter methylation was also seen in most breast tumours, but only in a limited number of normal tissues. The methylation of TSC2 promoter appears to be less frequent. MDA MB 468, MDA MB 483, MDA MB 435S and weakly MDA MB 435 were found to have methylated TSC2 promoter. In breast tissues, however, a very small number of samples were found to have methylation of the TSC2 promoter. CONCLUSION: TSC1 genes are aberrantly expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and breast tumour tissues and their promoters are seen to be methylated in breast tumour tissues. The expression of TSC1 is associated with an unfavourable clinical outcome in patients with breast cancer.. PURPOSE: The tuberous sclerosis (TSC) genes TSC1 and TSC2 encode the protein products hamartin and tuberin, respectively, and are putative tumour suppressor genes. Germ-line mutation of either TSC gene leads to the development of the heritable disorder TSC. This disorder is characterized by the development of hamartomas in many organs and is associated with the proliferative lung disease, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, the brain tumour giant cell astrocytoma and occasionally with renal cell carcinoma. However, the TSC genes have not been studied in breast cancer. The current study investigated the expression of the TSC gene products and the potential mechanisms of their aberrancy in human breast cancer cells and tissues. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS: Using immunohistochemical analysis, both hamartin and tuberin were found to be strongly stained in normal mammary epithelial cells and weakly in stromal cells. In invasive tumour tissues, however, the staining of both proteins were to be markedly reduced (P < 0.01). At message level, although normal and tumour tissues expressed both TSC products, the transcript levels of tuberin was significantly lower in tumour tissues compared with normal tissues (P < 0.05). There was no statistical difference between node negative and node positive tumours with both hamartin and tuberin. Tumours from patients who developed recurrence and died from breast cancer had significantly low levels of tuberin compared with those who remained disease free (P = 0.03 and 0.05, respectively). Likewise, hamartin levels were significantly lower in patients with metastasis, recurrence and mortality, when compared with those remained disease free (P = 0.001, 0.041 and 0.003, respectively). Using methylation specific PCR, the TSC1 promoter was found to be heavily methylated in ZR751, MDA MB 435, and BT549, but not in MCF-7 which expressed highly level of hamartin. TSC1 promoter methylation was also seen in most breast tumours, but only in a limited number of normal tissues. The methylation of TSC2 promoter appears to be less frequent. MDA MB 468, MDA MB 483, MDA MB 435S and weakly MDA MB 435 were found to have methylated TSC2 promoter. In breast tissues, however, a very small number of samples were found to have methylation of the TSC2 promoter. CONCLUSION: TSC1 genes are aberrantly expressed in human breast cancer cell lines and breast tumour tissues and their promoters are seen to be methylated in breast tumour tissues. The expression of TSC1 is associated with an unfavourable clinical outcome in patients with breast cancer.

PURPOSE: Epigenetic alterations have been investigated as prognostic indicators in breast cancer but their translation into clinical practice has been impeded by a lack of appropriate validation. We present the results of a meta-analysis of the associations between RASSF1A promoter methylation status and both disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) in female breast cancer. METHODS: Eligible studies were identified through searching the PubMed, Web of Science and Embase databases. Studies were pooled and summary hazard ratios (HR) with corresponding confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. Funnel plots were also carried out to evaluate publication bias. RESULTS: A total of 1795 patients from eight studies were included in the meta-analysis. There are eight studies which investigated DFS in 1795 cases. The relative hazard estimates ranged from 1.77-5.64 with a combined HR of 2.75 (95%CI 1.96-3.84). The HR of RASSF1A promoter methylation on DFS adjusted for other potential prognostic factors was 2.54 (95%CI 1.77-3.66). There has been five trials which analyzed the associations of RASSF1A promoter methylation status with OS in 1439 patients. The hazard estimates ranged from 1.21-6.90 with a combined random-effects estimates of 3.47 (95%CI 1.44-8.34). OS reported in multivariate analysis was evaluated in four series comprising 1346 cases and the summarized random-effects HR estimate was 3.35 (95%CI 1.14-9.85). Additionally, no publication bias was detected for both OS and DFS. CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis suggest that RASSF1A promoter hypermethylation confers a higher risk of relapse and a worse survival in patients with breast cancer. Large prospective studies are now needed to establish the clinical utility of RASSF1A promoter methylation.. PURPOSE: Epigenetic alterations have been investigated as prognostic indicators in breast cancer but their translation into clinical practice has been impeded by a lack of appropriate validation. We present the results of a meta-analysis of the associations between RASSF1A promoter methylation status and both disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) in female breast cancer. METHODS: Eligible studies were identified through searching the PubMed, Web of Science and Embase databases. Studies were pooled and summary hazard ratios (HR) with corresponding confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. Funnel plots were also carried out to evaluate publication bias. RESULTS: A total of 1795 patients from eight studies were included in the meta-analysis. There are eight studies which investigated DFS in 1795 cases. The relative hazard estimates ranged from 1.77-5.64 with a combined HR of 2.75 (95%CI 1.96-3.84). The HR of RASSF1A promoter methylation on DFS adjusted for other potential prognostic factors was 2.54 (95%CI 1.77-3.66). There has been five trials which analyzed the associations of RASSF1A promoter methylation status with OS in 1439 patients. The hazard estimates ranged from 1.21-6.90 with a combined random-effects estimates of 3.47 (95%CI 1.44-8.34). OS reported in multivariate analysis was evaluated in four series comprising 1346 cases and the summarized random-effects HR estimate was 3.35 (95%CI 1.14-9.85). Additionally, no publication bias was detected for both OS and DFS. CONCLUSION: The results of this meta-analysis suggest that RASSF1A promoter hypermethylation confers a higher risk of relapse and a worse survival in patients with breast cancer. Large prospective studies are now needed to establish the clinical utility of RASSF1A promoter methylation.

BACKGROUND: Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is a novel tumor suppressor gene that is frequently silenced by promoter hypermethylation in gastric cancer. In this study, we aimed to analyze the methylation status of the RUNX3 promoter in breast cancer and to evaluate the relationship between RUNX3 expression and breast carcinogenesis and prognosis. METHODS: RT-PCR and Western blot were applied on 5 breast cancer cell lines, the human normal breast cell line Hs578Bst and 30 pairs of breast cancer and their matching normal breast tissues to detect mRNA and protein expression of the RUNX3 gene. Methylation-specific PCR was employed to detect the methylation status of the RUNX3 promoter. Immunohistochemical study was performed to analyze RUNX3 protein expression in 88 breast cancer tissues and 40 breast fibroadenomas. RESULTS: The expression of RUNX3 mRNA and protein were negative in 3 breast cancer cell lines (T47D, MCF7 and SKBR3) as analyzed by RT-PCR and Western blotting. Hypermethylation of the RUNX3 promotor was identified in the T47D and MCF7 cell lines, but was not detected in SKBR3. Western blot analysis showed that the RUNX3 protein of 44 kDa was detected in 15 of 30 (50%) breast cancers. However, RUNX3 protein was detected in all normal breast tissues. Methylation was detected in 13 of the 15 tissues (86.67%) that did not express RUNX3 protein, but was never detected in any surrounding normal tissues. Immunohistochemistry results revealed that the positive rate of RUNX3 protein expression in breast cancer (35.23%) was much lower than that in breast fibroadenoma (85%). RUNX3 expression was correlated with tumor infiltration, clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and the expression of estrogen and progesterone receptor (p < 0.05), but was not related to age, tumor types and pathological grade (p > 0.05). The survival rate of the patients with RUNX3-positive expression was higher than that with RUNX3-negative expression (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The expression of RUNX3 gene is decreased in breast cancer. The RUNX3 gene may play an important role in the carcinogenesis of breast cancer. The mechanism of its inactivation may be hypermethylation of the promoter. With the increased progression of breast cancer, the expression of RUNX3 protein tends to decrease. The expression of RUNX3 protein has a definite value in judging prognosis in breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is a novel tumor suppressor gene that is frequently silenced by promoter hypermethylation in gastric cancer. In this study, we aimed to analyze the methylation status of the RUNX3 promoter in breast cancer and to evaluate the relationship between RUNX3 expression and breast carcinogenesis and prognosis. METHODS: RT-PCR and Western blot were applied on 5 breast cancer cell lines, the human normal breast cell line Hs578Bst and 30 pairs of breast cancer and their matching normal breast tissues to detect mRNA and protein expression of the RUNX3 gene. Methylation-specific PCR was employed to detect the methylation status of the RUNX3 promoter. Immunohistochemical study was performed to analyze RUNX3 protein expression in 88 breast cancer tissues and 40 breast fibroadenomas. RESULTS: The expression of RUNX3 mRNA and protein were negative in 3 breast cancer cell lines (T47D, MCF7 and SKBR3) as analyzed by RT-PCR and Western blotting. Hypermethylation of the RUNX3 promotor was identified in the T47D and MCF7 cell lines, but was not detected in SKBR3. Western blot analysis showed that the RUNX3 protein of 44 kDa was detected in 15 of 30 (50%) breast cancers. However, RUNX3 protein was detected in all normal breast tissues. Methylation was detected in 13 of the 15 tissues (86.67%) that did not express RUNX3 protein, but was never detected in any surrounding normal tissues. Immunohistochemistry results revealed that the positive rate of RUNX3 protein expression in breast cancer (35.23%) was much lower than that in breast fibroadenoma (85%). RUNX3 expression was correlated with tumor infiltration, clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and the expression of estrogen and progesterone receptor (p < 0.05), but was not related to age, tumor types and pathological grade (p > 0.05). The survival rate of the patients with RUNX3-positive expression was higher than that with RUNX3-negative expression (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The expression of RUNX3 gene is decreased in breast cancer. The RUNX3 gene may play an important role in the carcinogenesis of breast cancer. The mechanism of its inactivation may be hypermethylation of the promoter. With the increased progression of breast cancer, the expression of RUNX3 protein tends to decrease. The expression of RUNX3 protein has a definite value in judging prognosis in breast cancer.

Heparanase promotes tumor invasion and metastasis in several malignancies including breast cancer. However, the roles and regulation mechanisms of heparanase during breast cancer progression are still not fully understood. The aim of this study is to determine the differential regulation of heparanase gene expression in specific stages of breast cancer by DNA methylation. We detected levels of heparanase expression and DNA methylation patterns of its promoter in breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-435) and clinical tissues, respectively. It has been observed that heparanase is highly expressed in the invasive MDA-MB-435 cells with low methylation modification in the heparanase promoter. In contrast, lower expression of heparanase in MCF-7 cells is accompanied by higher methylation in the promoter. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), a potent demethylating agent, results in induction of heparanase expression and higher invasion potential in vitro and leads to an advantage of tumor formation in vivo. In 54 tissue samples, cancer samples at late stages (stage IV) showed the highest heparanase expression accomplished by little DNA methylation. On the contrary, methylation prevalence is highest in normal tissue and inversely correlated with heparanase expression. A significant correlation between DNA methylation and clinical stage was demonstrated (p = 0.012). Collectively, these results demonstrate that DNA methylation play the regulation role in heparanase gene in different stages of breast cancer and present a direct effect on tumor progression.. Heparanase promotes tumor invasion and metastasis in several malignancies including breast cancer. However, the roles and regulation mechanisms of heparanase during breast cancer progression are still not fully understood. The aim of this study is to determine the differential regulation of heparanase gene expression in specific stages of breast cancer by DNA methylation. We detected levels of heparanase expression and DNA methylation patterns of its promoter in breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-435) and clinical tissues, respectively. It has been observed that heparanase is highly expressed in the invasive MDA-MB-435 cells with low methylation modification in the heparanase promoter. In contrast, lower expression of heparanase in MCF-7 cells is accompanied by higher methylation in the promoter. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), a potent demethylating agent, results in induction of heparanase expression and higher invasion potential in vitro and leads to an advantage of tumor formation in vivo. In 54 tissue samples, cancer samples at late stages (stage IV) showed the highest heparanase expression accomplished by little DNA methylation. On the contrary, methylation prevalence is highest in normal tissue and inversely correlated with heparanase expression. A significant correlation between DNA methylation and clinical stage was demonstrated (p = 0.012). Collectively, these results demonstrate that DNA methylation play the regulation role in heparanase gene in different stages of breast cancer and present a direct effect on tumor progression.

Inflammation has been recently acknowledged as a key participant in the physiopathology of oncogenesis and tumor progression. The inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta has been reported to induce the expression of markers associated with malignancy in breast cancerous cells through Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). Aggressive breast cancer tumors classified as Triple Negative do not respond to hormonal treatment because they lack three crucial receptors, one of which is the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). Expression of ERalpha is then considered a good prognostic marker for tamoxifen treatment of this type of cancer, as the binding of this drug to the receptor blocks the transcriptional activity of the latter. Although it has been suggested that inflammatory cytokines in the tumor microenvironment could regulate ERalpha expression, the mechanism(s) involved in this process have not yet been established. We show here that, in a cell model of breast cancer cells (6D cells), in which the inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta induces EMT by activation of the IL-1beta/IL-1RI/beta-catenin pathway, the up regulation of TWIST1 leads to methylation of the ESR1 gene promoter. This epigenetic modification produced significant decrease of the ERalpha receptor levels and increased resistance to tamoxifen. The direct participation of IL-1beta in these processes was validated by blockage of the cytokine-induced signaling pathway by wortmannin inactivation of the effectors PI3K/AKT. These results support our previous reports that have suggested direct participation of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta in the transition to malignancy of breast cancer cells.. Inflammation has been recently acknowledged as a key participant in the physiopathology of oncogenesis and tumor progression. The inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta has been reported to induce the expression of markers associated with malignancy in breast cancerous cells through Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT). Aggressive breast cancer tumors classified as Triple Negative do not respond to hormonal treatment because they lack three crucial receptors, one of which is the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). Expression of ERalpha is then considered a good prognostic marker for tamoxifen treatment of this type of cancer, as the binding of this drug to the receptor blocks the transcriptional activity of the latter. Although it has been suggested that inflammatory cytokines in the tumor microenvironment could regulate ERalpha expression, the mechanism(s) involved in this process have not yet been established. We show here that, in a cell model of breast cancer cells (6D cells), in which the inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta induces EMT by activation of the IL-1beta/IL-1RI/beta-catenin pathway, the up regulation of TWIST1 leads to methylation of the ESR1 gene promoter. This epigenetic modification produced significant decrease of the ERalpha receptor levels and increased resistance to tamoxifen. The direct participation of IL-1beta in these processes was validated by blockage of the cytokine-induced signaling pathway by wortmannin inactivation of the effectors PI3K/AKT. These results support our previous reports that have suggested direct participation of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1beta in the transition to malignancy of breast cancer cells.

Breast cancer has a high mortality rate for females. Aberrant DNA methylation plays a crucial role in the occurrence and progression of breast carcinoma. By comparing DNA methylation differences between tumor breast tissue and normal breast tissue, we calculate and analyze the distributions of the hyper- and hypomethylation sites in different function regions. Results indicate that enhancer regions are often hypomethylated in breast cancer. CpG islands (CGIs) are mainly hypermethylated, while the flanking CGI (shores and shelves) is more easily hypomethylated. The hypomethylation in gene body region is related to the upregulation of gene expression, and the hypomethylation of enhancer regions is closely associated with gene expression upregulation in breast cancer. Some key hypomethylation sites in enhancer regions and key hypermethylation sites in CGIs for regulating key genes are, respectively, found, such as oncogenes ESR1 and ERBB2 and tumor suppressor genes FBLN2, CEBPA, and FAT4. This suggests that the recognizing methylation status of these genes will be useful for the diagnosis of breast cancer.. Breast cancer has a high mortality rate for females. Aberrant DNA methylation plays a crucial role in the occurrence and progression of breast carcinoma. By comparing DNA methylation differences between tumor breast tissue and normal breast tissue, we calculate and analyze the distributions of the hyper- and hypomethylation sites in different function regions. Results indicate that enhancer regions are often hypomethylated in breast cancer. CpG islands (CGIs) are mainly hypermethylated, while the flanking CGI (shores and shelves) is more easily hypomethylated. The hypomethylation in gene body region is related to the upregulation of gene expression, and the hypomethylation of enhancer regions is closely associated with gene expression upregulation in breast cancer. Some key hypomethylation sites in enhancer regions and key hypermethylation sites in CGIs for regulating key genes are, respectively, found, such as oncogenes ESR1 and ERBB2 and tumor suppressor genes FBLN2, CEBPA, and FAT4. This suggests that the recognizing methylation status of these genes will be useful for the diagnosis of breast cancer.

Histone lysine methylation, which plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression, genome stability, chromosome conformation and cell differentiation, is a dynamic process that is collaboratively regulated by lysine methyltransferases (KMTs) and lysine demethylases (KDMs). LSD1, the first identified KDMs, catalyzes the demethylation of mono- and di-methylated H3K4 and H3K9. Here, we systematically investigated the effects of LSD1 knockdown on histone methylations. Surprisingly, in addition to H3K4 and H3K9, the methylation level on other histone lysines, such as H3K27, H3K36 and H3K79, are also increased. The expression of SOX2, E-cadherin and FoxA2 are increased upon LSD1 knockdown, and the methylation level of H3K4, H3K27 and H3K36 in the promoter region of these genes are all changed after LSD1 knockdown. Our results show that LSD1 knockdown has a broad effect on histone lysine methylation, which indicates that LSD1 regulates histone lysine methylation in collaboration with other KMTs and KDMs.. Histone lysine methylation, which plays an important role in the regulation of gene expression, genome stability, chromosome conformation and cell differentiation, is a dynamic process that is collaboratively regulated by lysine methyltransferases (KMTs) and lysine demethylases (KDMs). LSD1, the first identified KDMs, catalyzes the demethylation of mono- and di-methylated H3K4 and H3K9. Here, we systematically investigated the effects of LSD1 knockdown on histone methylations. Surprisingly, in addition to H3K4 and H3K9, the methylation level on other histone lysines, such as H3K27, H3K36 and H3K79, are also increased. The expression of SOX2, E-cadherin and FoxA2 are increased upon LSD1 knockdown, and the methylation level of H3K4, H3K27 and H3K36 in the promoter region of these genes are all changed after LSD1 knockdown. Our results show that LSD1 knockdown has a broad effect on histone lysine methylation, which indicates that LSD1 regulates histone lysine methylation in collaboration with other KMTs and KDMs.

OBJECTIVE: DNA methylation is a common molecular alteration in human neoplasia and can be detected easily in the bloodstream of patients. Here, we investigated whether DNA methylation in sera is of prognostic significance in breast cancer patients. METHODS: Methylation status of BRCA1, p16 and 14-3-3sigma was examined by methylation-specific PCR assay in the sera of sporadic breast cancer patients and healthy serum controls. RESULTS: The panel gene methylation frequencies were 29% of sporadic breast cancers for p16, 32% for BRCA1 and 82% for 14-3-3sigma; all were significantly associated with grades and estrogen receptor status. Only p16 methylation was associated with histological type. p16 and BRCA1 methylation were associated with progesterone receptor status, while 14-3-3sigma was significantly associated with lymph node metastases. Seventy percent of patients with p16 methylation showed elevated serum CEA levels; of the breast cancer patients with BRCA1 methylation, 75.8% showed elevated serum CEA levels and 69.7% showed elevated serum CA15.3 levels. When analyzing all investigated patients, multivariate analysis showed methylated BRCA1 and/or p16 serum DNA to be independently associated with poor outcome, with a relative risk of death of 6.0. CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic markers in sera, especially BRCA1/p16, may be more promising targets for the diagnosis of sporadic breast cancer than previous prognostic markers.. OBJECTIVE: DNA methylation is a common molecular alteration in human neoplasia and can be detected easily in the bloodstream of patients. Here, we investigated whether DNA methylation in sera is of prognostic significance in breast cancer patients. METHODS: Methylation status of BRCA1, p16 and 14-3-3sigma was examined by methylation-specific PCR assay in the sera of sporadic breast cancer patients and healthy serum controls. RESULTS: The panel gene methylation frequencies were 29% of sporadic breast cancers for p16, 32% for BRCA1 and 82% for 14-3-3sigma; all were significantly associated with grades and estrogen receptor status. Only p16 methylation was associated with histological type. p16 and BRCA1 methylation were associated with progesterone receptor status, while 14-3-3sigma was significantly associated with lymph node metastases. Seventy percent of patients with p16 methylation showed elevated serum CEA levels; of the breast cancer patients with BRCA1 methylation, 75.8% showed elevated serum CEA levels and 69.7% showed elevated serum CA15.3 levels. When analyzing all investigated patients, multivariate analysis showed methylated BRCA1 and/or p16 serum DNA to be independently associated with poor outcome, with a relative risk of death of 6.0. CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic markers in sera, especially BRCA1/p16, may be more promising targets for the diagnosis of sporadic breast cancer than previous prognostic markers.

Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) appears to be characterized by a relatively unfavorable prognosis and lack of a specific therapeutic target. Estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) has been widely accepted as a prognostic marker and a predictor for endocrine therapy response of breast cancer. This study aimed to clarify the correlation of ERalpha methylation with the pathogenesis and clinicopathological significance of sporadic BLBC of Chinese women without a family history of the cancer. The methylation of ERalpha promoter was investigated in genomic DNA of 60 sporadic BLBC with 108 cases of non-BLBC as control by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. We also investigated the expression of p53, breast cancer gene (BRCA)-1, and BRCA-2 by immunohistochemistry and analyzed the correlation between ERalpha methylation and clinicopathological features of BLBC. ERalpha methylation was observed in 48 of 60 (80.0%) sporadic BLBC, which was significantly higher than in sporadic non-BLBC cancer (47/108, 43.5%; chi2=20.89, p<0.01). No correlation was found between the ERalpha methylation and age and menopausal status, while it was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis, tumor stage, nuclear p53 accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 expression in sporadic BLBC. The ERalpha methylation status in basal-like breast cancer was significantly higher than in sporadic non-basal-like breast cancer. It was associated with the lymph node metastasis, tumor stage, p53 nuclear accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 expression in BLBC. It may play an important role in BLBC pathogenesis.. Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) appears to be characterized by a relatively unfavorable prognosis and lack of a specific therapeutic target. Estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) has been widely accepted as a prognostic marker and a predictor for endocrine therapy response of breast cancer. This study aimed to clarify the correlation of ERalpha methylation with the pathogenesis and clinicopathological significance of sporadic BLBC of Chinese women without a family history of the cancer. The methylation of ERalpha promoter was investigated in genomic DNA of 60 sporadic BLBC with 108 cases of non-BLBC as control by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. We also investigated the expression of p53, breast cancer gene (BRCA)-1, and BRCA-2 by immunohistochemistry and analyzed the correlation between ERalpha methylation and clinicopathological features of BLBC. ERalpha methylation was observed in 48 of 60 (80.0%) sporadic BLBC, which was significantly higher than in sporadic non-BLBC cancer (47/108, 43.5%; chi2=20.89, p<0.01). No correlation was found between the ERalpha methylation and age and menopausal status, while it was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis, tumor stage, nuclear p53 accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 expression in sporadic BLBC. The ERalpha methylation status in basal-like breast cancer was significantly higher than in sporadic non-basal-like breast cancer. It was associated with the lymph node metastasis, tumor stage, p53 nuclear accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 expression in BLBC. It may play an important role in BLBC pathogenesis.

Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease that shares both similarities and differences with female breast cancer (FBC). The aim of this study was to assess genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in MBC and compare them with the previously identified transcriptional subgroups of MBC, luminal M1 and M2, as well as the intrinsic subtypes of FBC. Illumina's 450K Infinium arrays were applied to 47 MBC and 188 FBC tumors. Unsupervised clustering of the most variable CpGs among MBC tumors revealed two stable epitypes, designated ME1 and ME2. The methylation patterns differed significantly between the groups and were closely associated with the transcriptional subgroups luminal M1 and M2. Tumors in the ME1 group were more proliferative and aggressive than ME2 tumors, and showed a tendency toward inferior survival. ME1 tumors also displayed hypermethylation of PRC2 target genes and high expression of EZH2, one of the core components of PRC2. Upon combined analysis of MBC and FBC tumors, ME1 MBCs clustered among luminal B FBC tumors and ME2 MBCs clustered within the predominantly luminal A FBC cluster. The majority of the MBC tumors remained grouped together within the clusters rather than being interspersed among the FBC tumors. Differences in the genomic location of methylated CpGs, as well as in the regulation of central canonical pathways may explain the separation between MBC and FBC tumors in the respective clusters. These findings further suggest that MBC is not readily defined using conventional criteria applied to FBC.. Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease that shares both similarities and differences with female breast cancer (FBC). The aim of this study was to assess genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in MBC and compare them with the previously identified transcriptional subgroups of MBC, luminal M1 and M2, as well as the intrinsic subtypes of FBC. Illumina's 450K Infinium arrays were applied to 47 MBC and 188 FBC tumors. Unsupervised clustering of the most variable CpGs among MBC tumors revealed two stable epitypes, designated ME1 and ME2. The methylation patterns differed significantly between the groups and were closely associated with the transcriptional subgroups luminal M1 and M2. Tumors in the ME1 group were more proliferative and aggressive than ME2 tumors, and showed a tendency toward inferior survival. ME1 tumors also displayed hypermethylation of PRC2 target genes and high expression of EZH2, one of the core components of PRC2. Upon combined analysis of MBC and FBC tumors, ME1 MBCs clustered among luminal B FBC tumors and ME2 MBCs clustered within the predominantly luminal A FBC cluster. The majority of the MBC tumors remained grouped together within the clusters rather than being interspersed among the FBC tumors. Differences in the genomic location of methylated CpGs, as well as in the regulation of central canonical pathways may explain the separation between MBC and FBC tumors in the respective clusters. These findings further suggest that MBC is not readily defined using conventional criteria applied to FBC.

BACKGROUND: The underlying biological mechanisms through which epidemiologically defined breast cancer risk factors contribute to disease risk remain poorly understood. Identification of the molecular changes associated with cancer risk factors in normal tissues may aid in determining the earliest events of carcinogenesis and informing cancer prevention strategies. METHODS: Here we investigated the impact cancer risk factors have on the normal breast epigenome by analyzing DNA methylation genome-wide (Infinium 450 K array) in cancer-free women from the Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank (n = 100). We tested the relation of established breast cancer risk factors, age, body mass index, parity, and family history of disease, with DNA methylation adjusting for potential variation in cell-type proportions. RESULTS: We identified 787 cytosine-guanine dinucleotide (CpG) sites that demonstrated significant associations (Q value <0.01) with subject age. Notably, DNA methylation was not strongly associated with the other evaluated breast cancer risk factors. Age-related DNA methylation changes are primarily increases in methylation enriched at breast epithelial cell enhancer regions (P = 7.1E-20), and binding sites of chromatin remodelers (MYC and CTCF). We validated the age-related associations in two independent populations, using normal breast tissue samples (n = 18) and samples of normal tissue adjacent to tumor tissue (n = 97). The genomic regions classified as age-related were more likely to be regions altered in both pre-invasive (n = 40, P = 3.0E-03) and invasive breast tumors (n = 731, P = 1.1E-13). CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation changes with age occur at regulatory regions, and are further exacerbated in cancer, suggesting that age influences breast cancer risk in part through its contribution to epigenetic dysregulation in normal breast tissue.. BACKGROUND: The underlying biological mechanisms through which epidemiologically defined breast cancer risk factors contribute to disease risk remain poorly understood. Identification of the molecular changes associated with cancer risk factors in normal tissues may aid in determining the earliest events of carcinogenesis and informing cancer prevention strategies. METHODS: Here we investigated the impact cancer risk factors have on the normal breast epigenome by analyzing DNA methylation genome-wide (Infinium 450 K array) in cancer-free women from the Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank (n = 100). We tested the relation of established breast cancer risk factors, age, body mass index, parity, and family history of disease, with DNA methylation adjusting for potential variation in cell-type proportions. RESULTS: We identified 787 cytosine-guanine dinucleotide (CpG) sites that demonstrated significant associations (Q value <0.01) with subject age. Notably, DNA methylation was not strongly associated with the other evaluated breast cancer risk factors. Age-related DNA methylation changes are primarily increases in methylation enriched at breast epithelial cell enhancer regions (P = 7.1E-20), and binding sites of chromatin remodelers (MYC and CTCF). We validated the age-related associations in two independent populations, using normal breast tissue samples (n = 18) and samples of normal tissue adjacent to tumor tissue (n = 97). The genomic regions classified as age-related were more likely to be regions altered in both pre-invasive (n = 40, P = 3.0E-03) and invasive breast tumors (n = 731, P = 1.1E-13). CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation changes with age occur at regulatory regions, and are further exacerbated in cancer, suggesting that age influences breast cancer risk in part through its contribution to epigenetic dysregulation in normal breast tissue.

Age is a key risk factor for breast cancer and epigenetic alterations may contribute to age-related increases in breast cancer risk, though the relation of age-related methylation in normal breast tissues with altered methylation in breast tumors is unclear. We investigated the relation of age with DNA methylation in normal breast tissues genome-wide using two data sets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (GSE32393 and GSE31979). We validated our observations in an independent set of normal breast tissues, examined age-related methylation in normal breast for enrichment of genomic features, and compared age-related methylation in normal tissue with methylation alterations in breast tumors. Between the two array-based methylation data sets, there were 204 CpG loci with significant (P<0.05) and consistent age-related methylation, 97% of which were increases in methylation. Our validation sets confirmed the direction of age-related DNA methylation changes in all measured regions. Among the 204 age-related CpG loci, we observed a significant enrichment for CpG islands (P = 8.7E-6) and polycomb group protein target genes (P = 0.03). In addition, 24 of the 204 CpGs with age-related methylation in normal breast were significantly differentially methylated between normal and breast tumor tissues. We identified consistent age-related methylation changes in normal breast tissue that are further altered in breast tumors and may represent early events contributing to breast carcinogenesis. This work identifies age-related methylation in normal breast tissue and begins to deconstruct the contribution of aging to epigenetic alterations present in breast tumors.. Age is a key risk factor for breast cancer and epigenetic alterations may contribute to age-related increases in breast cancer risk, though the relation of age-related methylation in normal breast tissues with altered methylation in breast tumors is unclear. We investigated the relation of age with DNA methylation in normal breast tissues genome-wide using two data sets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (GSE32393 and GSE31979). We validated our observations in an independent set of normal breast tissues, examined age-related methylation in normal breast for enrichment of genomic features, and compared age-related methylation in normal tissue with methylation alterations in breast tumors. Between the two array-based methylation data sets, there were 204 CpG loci with significant (P<0.05) and consistent age-related methylation, 97% of which were increases in methylation. Our validation sets confirmed the direction of age-related DNA methylation changes in all measured regions. Among the 204 age-related CpG loci, we observed a significant enrichment for CpG islands (P = 8.7E-6) and polycomb group protein target genes (P = 0.03). In addition, 24 of the 204 CpGs with age-related methylation in normal breast were significantly differentially methylated between normal and breast tumor tissues. We identified consistent age-related methylation changes in normal breast tissue that are further altered in breast tumors and may represent early events contributing to breast carcinogenesis. This work identifies age-related methylation in normal breast tissue and begins to deconstruct the contribution of aging to epigenetic alterations present in breast tumors.

BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a heterogeneous, pre-invasive lesion associated with an increased risk for future invasive ductal carcinoma. However, accurate risk stratification for development of invasive disease and appropriate treatment decisions remain clinical challenges. DNA methylation alterations are early events in the progression of cancer and represent emerging molecular markers that may predict invasive recurrence more accurately than traditional measures of DCIS prognosis. RESULTS: We measured DNA methylation using the Illumina HumanMethylation450K array of estrogen-receptor positive DCIS (n = 40) and adjacent-normal (n = 15) tissues from subjects in the New Hampshire Mammography Network longitudinal breast imaging registry. We identified locus-specific methylation differences between DCIS and matched adjacent-normal tissue (95,609 CpGs, Q < 0.05). Among 40 DCIS cases, 13 later developed invasive disease and we identified 641 CpG sites that exhibited differential DNA methylation (P < 0.01 and median |beta| > 0.1) in these cases compared with age-matched subjects without invasive disease. The set of differentially methylated CpG loci associated with disease progression was enriched in homeobox-containing genes (P = 1.3E-09) and genes involved with limb morphogenesis (P = 1.0E-05). In an independent cohort, a subset of genes with progression-related differential methylation between DCIS and invasive breast cancer were confirmed. Further, the functional relevance of these genes' regulation by methylation was demonstrated in early stage breast cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas database. CONCLUSIONS: This work contributes to the understanding of epigenetic alterations that occur in DCIS and illustrates the potential of DNA methylation as markers of DCIS progression.. BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a heterogeneous, pre-invasive lesion associated with an increased risk for future invasive ductal carcinoma. However, accurate risk stratification for development of invasive disease and appropriate treatment decisions remain clinical challenges. DNA methylation alterations are early events in the progression of cancer and represent emerging molecular markers that may predict invasive recurrence more accurately than traditional measures of DCIS prognosis. RESULTS: We measured DNA methylation using the Illumina HumanMethylation450K array of estrogen-receptor positive DCIS (n = 40) and adjacent-normal (n = 15) tissues from subjects in the New Hampshire Mammography Network longitudinal breast imaging registry. We identified locus-specific methylation differences between DCIS and matched adjacent-normal tissue (95,609 CpGs, Q < 0.05). Among 40 DCIS cases, 13 later developed invasive disease and we identified 641 CpG sites that exhibited differential DNA methylation (P < 0.01 and median |beta| > 0.1) in these cases compared with age-matched subjects without invasive disease. The set of differentially methylated CpG loci associated with disease progression was enriched in homeobox-containing genes (P = 1.3E-09) and genes involved with limb morphogenesis (P = 1.0E-05). In an independent cohort, a subset of genes with progression-related differential methylation between DCIS and invasive breast cancer were confirmed. Further, the functional relevance of these genes' regulation by methylation was demonstrated in early stage breast cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas database. CONCLUSIONS: This work contributes to the understanding of epigenetic alterations that occur in DCIS and illustrates the potential of DNA methylation as markers of DCIS progression.

Mendelian-like inheritance of germline DNA methylation in cancer susceptibility genes has been previously reported. We aimed to scan the genome for heritable methylation marks associated with breast cancer susceptibility by studying 25 Australian multiple-case breast cancer families. Here we report genome-wide DNA methylation measured in 210 peripheral blood DNA samples provided by family members using the Infinium HumanMethylation450. We develop and apply a new statistical method to identify heritable methylation marks based on complex segregation analysis. We estimate carrier probabilities for the 1000 most heritable methylation marks based on family structure, and we use Cox proportional hazards survival analysis to identify 24 methylation marks with corresponding carrier probabilities significantly associated with breast cancer. We replicate an association with breast cancer risk for four of the 24 marks using an independent nested case-control study. Here, we report a novel approach for identifying heritable DNA methylation marks associated with breast cancer risk.. Mendelian-like inheritance of germline DNA methylation in cancer susceptibility genes has been previously reported. We aimed to scan the genome for heritable methylation marks associated with breast cancer susceptibility by studying 25 Australian multiple-case breast cancer families. Here we report genome-wide DNA methylation measured in 210 peripheral blood DNA samples provided by family members using the Infinium HumanMethylation450. We develop and apply a new statistical method to identify heritable methylation marks based on complex segregation analysis. We estimate carrier probabilities for the 1000 most heritable methylation marks based on family structure, and we use Cox proportional hazards survival analysis to identify 24 methylation marks with corresponding carrier probabilities significantly associated with breast cancer. We replicate an association with breast cancer risk for four of the 24 marks using an independent nested case-control study. Here, we report a novel approach for identifying heritable DNA methylation marks associated with breast cancer risk.

AIM: Here, we investigated how the St Gallen breast molecular subtypes displayed distinct histone H3 profiles. PATIENTS & METHODS: 192 breast tumors divided into five St Gallen molecular subtypes (luminal A, luminal B HER2-, luminal B HER2+, HER2+ and basal-like) were evaluated for their histone H3 modifications on gene promoters. RESULTS: ANOVA analysis allowed to identify specific H3 signatures according to three groups of genes: hormonal receptor genes (ERS1, ERS2, PGR), genes modifying histones (EZH2, P300, SRC3) and tumor suppressor gene (BRCA1). A similar profile inside high-risk cancers (luminal B [HER2+], HER2+ and basal-like) compared with low-risk cancers including luminal A and luminal B (HER2-) were demonstrated. CONCLUSION: The H3 modifications might contribute to clarify the differences between breast cancer subtypes.. AIM: Here, we investigated how the St Gallen breast molecular subtypes displayed distinct histone H3 profiles. PATIENTS & METHODS: 192 breast tumors divided into five St Gallen molecular subtypes (luminal A, luminal B HER2-, luminal B HER2+, HER2+ and basal-like) were evaluated for their histone H3 modifications on gene promoters. RESULTS: ANOVA analysis allowed to identify specific H3 signatures according to three groups of genes: hormonal receptor genes (ERS1, ERS2, PGR), genes modifying histones (EZH2, P300, SRC3) and tumor suppressor gene (BRCA1). A similar profile inside high-risk cancers (luminal B [HER2+], HER2+ and basal-like) compared with low-risk cancers including luminal A and luminal B (HER2-) were demonstrated. CONCLUSION: The H3 modifications might contribute to clarify the differences between breast cancer subtypes.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA hypermethylation plays a pivotal role in carcinogenesis and disease progression; therefore, accurate measurement of differential gene methylation patterns among many genes is likely to reveal biomarkers for improved risk assessment. We evaluated the gene hypermethylation profiles of primary breast tumors and their corresponding normal tissues and investigated the association between major clinicopathological features and gene hypermethylation. METHODS: A single reaction using methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was used to analyze the DNA methylation status of 24 tumor suppressor genes in 60 cancerous tissues and their corresponding normal tissues from patients with primary breast cancer. RESULTS: In cancerous breast tissues, 21 of 24 genes displayed promoter methylation in one or more samples. The most frequently methylated genes included RASSF1 (43.3%), APC (31.7%), CDKN2B (25.0%), CDH13 (23.3%), GSTP1 (16.7%), and BRCA1 (10%). APC was associated with lymph node metastasis, and BRCA1 was associated with negative estrogen receptor and negative progesterone receptor expression. In normal breast tissues, 8 of 24 tumor suppressor genes displayed promoter hypermethylation; CDKN2B (28.3%) and RASSF1 (8.3%) hypermethylation were most frequently observed. CONCLUSIONS: RASSF1 and CDKN2B hypermethylation in Korean breast cancer patients were the most frequent in cancerous tissue and corresponding normal tissue, respectively. Our data indicates that methylation of specific genes is a frequent event in morphologically normal breast tissues adjacent to breast tumors as well as the corresponding breast cancers. This study also suggests that gene methylation is linked to various pathological features of breast cancer; however, this requires confirmation in a larger study.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA hypermethylation plays a pivotal role in carcinogenesis and disease progression; therefore, accurate measurement of differential gene methylation patterns among many genes is likely to reveal biomarkers for improved risk assessment. We evaluated the gene hypermethylation profiles of primary breast tumors and their corresponding normal tissues and investigated the association between major clinicopathological features and gene hypermethylation. METHODS: A single reaction using methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification was used to analyze the DNA methylation status of 24 tumor suppressor genes in 60 cancerous tissues and their corresponding normal tissues from patients with primary breast cancer. RESULTS: In cancerous breast tissues, 21 of 24 genes displayed promoter methylation in one or more samples. The most frequently methylated genes included RASSF1 (43.3%), APC (31.7%), CDKN2B (25.0%), CDH13 (23.3%), GSTP1 (16.7%), and BRCA1 (10%). APC was associated with lymph node metastasis, and BRCA1 was associated with negative estrogen receptor and negative progesterone receptor expression. In normal breast tissues, 8 of 24 tumor suppressor genes displayed promoter hypermethylation; CDKN2B (28.3%) and RASSF1 (8.3%) hypermethylation were most frequently observed. CONCLUSIONS: RASSF1 and CDKN2B hypermethylation in Korean breast cancer patients were the most frequent in cancerous tissue and corresponding normal tissue, respectively. Our data indicates that methylation of specific genes is a frequent event in morphologically normal breast tissues adjacent to breast tumors as well as the corresponding breast cancers. This study also suggests that gene methylation is linked to various pathological features of breast cancer; however, this requires confirmation in a larger study.

The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between the promoter methylation in five cancer-associated genes and clinicopathologic features for identification of molecular markers of tumor metastatic potential and hormone therapy response efficiency in breast cancer. The methylation levels in paraffin-embedded tumor tissues, plasma, and blood cells from 151 sporadic breast cancer patients and blood samples of 50 controls were evaluated by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. DNA methylation of RAS-association domain family member 1 (RASSF1A), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (CDH1), TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3) and spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) genes was detected in the tumors of 124, 19, 15, 15, and 6 patients with mean levels of 48.45%, 3.81%, 2.36%, 27.55%, and 10.81%, respectively. Plasma samples exhibited methylation in the same genes in 25, 10, 15, 17, and 3 patients with levels of 22.54%, 17.20%, 22.87%, 31.93%, and 27.42%, respectively. Cumulative methylation results confirmed different spectra in tumor and plasma samples. Simultaneous methylation in tumors and plasma were shown in less than 17% of patients. RASSF1A methylation levels in tumor samples statistically differ according to tumor size (P = .029), estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status (P = .000 and P = .004), and immunohistochemical subtype (P = .000). Moreover, the positive correlation was found between RASSF1A methylation levels and percentage of cancer cells expressing ER and PR. The direct relationship between RASSF1A promoter methylation and expression of ER could aid the prognosis of hormonal therapy response.. The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between the promoter methylation in five cancer-associated genes and clinicopathologic features for identification of molecular markers of tumor metastatic potential and hormone therapy response efficiency in breast cancer. The methylation levels in paraffin-embedded tumor tissues, plasma, and blood cells from 151 sporadic breast cancer patients and blood samples of 50 controls were evaluated by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. DNA methylation of RAS-association domain family member 1 (RASSF1A), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (CDH1), TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3) and spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) genes was detected in the tumors of 124, 19, 15, 15, and 6 patients with mean levels of 48.45%, 3.81%, 2.36%, 27.55%, and 10.81%, respectively. Plasma samples exhibited methylation in the same genes in 25, 10, 15, 17, and 3 patients with levels of 22.54%, 17.20%, 22.87%, 31.93%, and 27.42%, respectively. Cumulative methylation results confirmed different spectra in tumor and plasma samples. Simultaneous methylation in tumors and plasma were shown in less than 17% of patients. RASSF1A methylation levels in tumor samples statistically differ according to tumor size (P = .029), estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status (P = .000 and P = .004), and immunohistochemical subtype (P = .000). Moreover, the positive correlation was found between RASSF1A methylation levels and percentage of cancer cells expressing ER and PR. The direct relationship between RASSF1A promoter methylation and expression of ER could aid the prognosis of hormonal therapy response.

BACKGROUND: In breast cancer (BC), deregulation of DNA methylation leads to aberrant expressions and functions of key regulatory genes. In our study, we investigated the relationship between the methylation profiles of genes associated with cancer invasivity and clinico-pathological parameters. In detail, we studied differences in the methylation levels between BC patients with haematogenous and lymphogenous cancer dissemination. METHODS: We analysed samples of primary tumours (PTs), lymph node metastases (LNMs) and peripheral blood cells (PBCs) from 59 patients with sporadic disseminated BC. Evaluation of the DNA methylation levels of six genes related to invasivity, ADAM23, uPA, CXCL12, TWIST1, SNAI1 and SNAI2, was performed by pyrosequencing. RESULTS: Among the cancer-specific methylated genes, we found lower methylation levels of the SNAI2 gene in histologic grade 3 tumours (OR = 0.61; 95% CI, 0.39-0.97; P = 0.038) than in fully or moderately differentiated cancers. We also evaluated the methylation profiles in patients with different cancer cell dissemination statuses (positivity for circulating tumour cells (CTCs) and/or LNMs). We detected the significant association between reduced DNA methylation of ADAM23 in PTs and presence of CTCs in the peripheral blood of patients (OR = 0.45; 95% CI, 0.23-0.90; P = 0.023). CONCLUSION: The relationships between the decreased methylation levels of the SNAI2 and ADAM23 genes and cancer de-differentiation and haematogenous dissemination, respectively, indicate novel functions of those genes in the invasive processes. After experimental validation of the association between the lower values of SNAI2 and ADAM23 methylation and clinical features of aggressive BCs, these methylation profiles could improve the management of metastatic disease.. BACKGROUND: In breast cancer (BC), deregulation of DNA methylation leads to aberrant expressions and functions of key regulatory genes. In our study, we investigated the relationship between the methylation profiles of genes associated with cancer invasivity and clinico-pathological parameters. In detail, we studied differences in the methylation levels between BC patients with haematogenous and lymphogenous cancer dissemination. METHODS: We analysed samples of primary tumours (PTs), lymph node metastases (LNMs) and peripheral blood cells (PBCs) from 59 patients with sporadic disseminated BC. Evaluation of the DNA methylation levels of six genes related to invasivity, ADAM23, uPA, CXCL12, TWIST1, SNAI1 and SNAI2, was performed by pyrosequencing. RESULTS: Among the cancer-specific methylated genes, we found lower methylation levels of the SNAI2 gene in histologic grade 3 tumours (OR = 0.61; 95% CI, 0.39-0.97; P = 0.038) than in fully or moderately differentiated cancers. We also evaluated the methylation profiles in patients with different cancer cell dissemination statuses (positivity for circulating tumour cells (CTCs) and/or LNMs). We detected the significant association between reduced DNA methylation of ADAM23 in PTs and presence of CTCs in the peripheral blood of patients (OR = 0.45; 95% CI, 0.23-0.90; P = 0.023). CONCLUSION: The relationships between the decreased methylation levels of the SNAI2 and ADAM23 genes and cancer de-differentiation and haematogenous dissemination, respectively, indicate novel functions of those genes in the invasive processes. After experimental validation of the association between the lower values of SNAI2 and ADAM23 methylation and clinical features of aggressive BCs, these methylation profiles could improve the management of metastatic disease.

The diversity of breast cancers reflects variations in underlying biology and affects the clinical implications for patients. Gene expression studies have identified five major subtypes- Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like, ErbB2+ and Normal-Like. We set out to determine the role of DNA methylation in subtypes by performing genome-wide scans of CpG methylation in breast cancer samples with known expression-based subtypes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using a set of most varying loci clustered the tumors into a Luminal A majority (82%) cluster, Basal-like/ErbB2+ majority (86%) cluster and a non-specific cluster with samples that were also inconclusive in their expression-based subtype correlations. Contributing methylation loci were both gene associated loci (30%) and non-gene associated (70%), suggesting subtype dependant genome-wide alterations in the methylation landscape. The methylation patterns of significant differentially methylated genes in luminal A tumors are similar to those identified in CD24 + luminal epithelial cells and the patterns in basal-like tumors similar to CD44 + breast progenitor cells. CpG islands in the HOXA cluster and other homeobox (IRX2, DLX2, NKX2-2) genes were significantly more methylated in Luminal A tumors. A significant number of genes (2853, p < 0.05) exhibited expression-methylation correlation, implying possible functional effects of methylation on gene expression. Furthermore, analysis of these tumors by using follow-up survival data identified differential methylation of islands proximal to genes involved in Cell Cycle and Proliferation (Ki-67, UBE2C, KIF2C, HDAC4), angiogenesis (VEGF, BTG1, KLF5), cell fate commitment (SPRY1, OLIG2, LHX2 and LHX5) as having prognostic value independent of subtypes and other clinical factors.. The diversity of breast cancers reflects variations in underlying biology and affects the clinical implications for patients. Gene expression studies have identified five major subtypes- Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like, ErbB2+ and Normal-Like. We set out to determine the role of DNA methylation in subtypes by performing genome-wide scans of CpG methylation in breast cancer samples with known expression-based subtypes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using a set of most varying loci clustered the tumors into a Luminal A majority (82%) cluster, Basal-like/ErbB2+ majority (86%) cluster and a non-specific cluster with samples that were also inconclusive in their expression-based subtype correlations. Contributing methylation loci were both gene associated loci (30%) and non-gene associated (70%), suggesting subtype dependant genome-wide alterations in the methylation landscape. The methylation patterns of significant differentially methylated genes in luminal A tumors are similar to those identified in CD24 + luminal epithelial cells and the patterns in basal-like tumors similar to CD44 + breast progenitor cells. CpG islands in the HOXA cluster and other homeobox (IRX2, DLX2, NKX2-2) genes were significantly more methylated in Luminal A tumors. A significant number of genes (2853, p < 0.05) exhibited expression-methylation correlation, implying possible functional effects of methylation on gene expression. Furthermore, analysis of these tumors by using follow-up survival data identified differential methylation of islands proximal to genes involved in Cell Cycle and Proliferation (Ki-67, UBE2C, KIF2C, HDAC4), angiogenesis (VEGF, BTG1, KLF5), cell fate commitment (SPRY1, OLIG2, LHX2 and LHX5) as having prognostic value independent of subtypes and other clinical factors.

OBJECTIVE: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is investigated in depression related to medical disorders and its secretion is influenced by epigenetic factors. We investigated the association between BDNF promoter methylation and depression following mastectomy for breast cancer. METHODS: In total, 309 patients with breast cancer were evaluated 1 week after mastectomy, and 244 (79%) were followed up 1 year later. Depression was diagnosed (major or minor depressive disorder) according to DSM-IV criteria and depression severity was estimated by Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS). We assessed BDNF promoter methylation using leukocyte DNA. The effects of BDNF methylation on depression diagnosis and severity were investigated using multivariate logistic and linear regression models, respectively. The two-way interaction between BDNF methylation and the val66met polymorphism on depression was also evaluated using multivariate logistic regression models. RESULTS: Higher BDNF methylation was independently associated with depression diagnosis and with more severe symptoms at both 1 week and 1 year after mastectomy. No significant methylation-genotype interactions were found. CONCLUSION: A role for BDNF in depression related to breast cancer was supported. Indeed, the association between depression and BDNF methylation may be useful for identifying patients who are at high risk for depression and for suggesting directions for promising drug research.. OBJECTIVE: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is investigated in depression related to medical disorders and its secretion is influenced by epigenetic factors. We investigated the association between BDNF promoter methylation and depression following mastectomy for breast cancer. METHODS: In total, 309 patients with breast cancer were evaluated 1 week after mastectomy, and 244 (79%) were followed up 1 year later. Depression was diagnosed (major or minor depressive disorder) according to DSM-IV criteria and depression severity was estimated by Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS). We assessed BDNF promoter methylation using leukocyte DNA. The effects of BDNF methylation on depression diagnosis and severity were investigated using multivariate logistic and linear regression models, respectively. The two-way interaction between BDNF methylation and the val66met polymorphism on depression was also evaluated using multivariate logistic regression models. RESULTS: Higher BDNF methylation was independently associated with depression diagnosis and with more severe symptoms at both 1 week and 1 year after mastectomy. No significant methylation-genotype interactions were found. CONCLUSION: A role for BDNF in depression related to breast cancer was supported. Indeed, the association between depression and BDNF methylation may be useful for identifying patients who are at high risk for depression and for suggesting directions for promising drug research.

Aberrant methylation in the CpG sites located in the promoter region of several tumor suppressor genes has been reported in various types of cancers. However, the methylation status of the p53 promoter has not been clearly determined and no information is available on its role in breast cancer. The aim of the study was to determine the presence and timing of the methylation of CpG sites in the p53 promoter, in the progression from ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive cancer. We also explored the correlation between the CpG methylation of the p53 promoter and p53 mutation during the progression of breast cancer. The corresponding lesions of both the invasive and noninvasive types were microdissected in paraffin-embedded tissue of 26 breast carcinomas. Bisulfite-modified DNA sequencing for methylation status in the p53 promoter was carried out, and double-strand DNA sequencing was performed in the promoter region and exons 4 to 9 of the p53 gene. CpG site methylation in the p53 promoter was detected in three cases (11.5%). Two noninvasive and three invasive lesions harbored CpG methylation in the p53 promoter. Methylations in more than one site were observed in three lesions, all of which contained methylation in two sites. The methylated CpG sites were located near the AP1 and YY-1 binding sites and at the YY-1 binding site. The p53 mutation was not found in the lesions where methylation in p53 promoter region was evident. In 16 cases (61.5%), neither methylation nor p53 mutation was detected. We conclude that the methylation in the p53 promoter region is found in the breast cancer irrespective of the status of invasion, and that the hypermethylation in the p53 promoter region is an alternative pathway to tumorigenesis where there is no p53 gene mutation.. Aberrant methylation in the CpG sites located in the promoter region of several tumor suppressor genes has been reported in various types of cancers. However, the methylation status of the p53 promoter has not been clearly determined and no information is available on its role in breast cancer. The aim of the study was to determine the presence and timing of the methylation of CpG sites in the p53 promoter, in the progression from ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive cancer. We also explored the correlation between the CpG methylation of the p53 promoter and p53 mutation during the progression of breast cancer. The corresponding lesions of both the invasive and noninvasive types were microdissected in paraffin-embedded tissue of 26 breast carcinomas. Bisulfite-modified DNA sequencing for methylation status in the p53 promoter was carried out, and double-strand DNA sequencing was performed in the promoter region and exons 4 to 9 of the p53 gene. CpG site methylation in the p53 promoter was detected in three cases (11.5%). Two noninvasive and three invasive lesions harbored CpG methylation in the p53 promoter. Methylations in more than one site were observed in three lesions, all of which contained methylation in two sites. The methylated CpG sites were located near the AP1 and YY-1 binding sites and at the YY-1 binding site. The p53 mutation was not found in the lesions where methylation in p53 promoter region was evident. In 16 cases (61.5%), neither methylation nor p53 mutation was detected. We conclude that the methylation in the p53 promoter region is found in the breast cancer irrespective of the status of invasion, and that the hypermethylation in the p53 promoter region is an alternative pathway to tumorigenesis where there is no p53 gene mutation.

Methylation is an epigenetic alteration proved to be involved in many disease processes including cancer. This change affects mainly gene promoters and repetitive sequences in genome. Long Interspersed Nuclear Element-1 (LINE-1) is a family of retrotransposons - repetitive elements that modify gene activity and can themselves be targeted by epigenetic mechanisms. LINE-1 methylation level is a surrogate marker for global methylation. In many conditions this parameter is found to be altered not only in affected cell groups, but also throughout other tissues. The aim of our study was to compare LINE-1 methylation pattern in DNA extracted from blood of the patients with benign and malignant breast tissue. In addition, we investigated correlation of LINE-1 methylation in blood and tissues of same patients and relationship of all variables with histopathologic and phenotypic characteristics of tumors. Patients with biopsy-proved ductal invasive carcinoma of breast and no preoperative chemo/radiotherapy were chosen for the study group. Another pool of patients with various benign breast lesions represented controls. Blood samples from both group members were collected preoperatively. Tumor tissue sections were processed for pathology report and part of remaining tissue was used for methylation study. LINE-1 methylation level was quantified using ELISA-based assay. It was analyzed in combination with histologic and phenotypic tumor parameters and compared between different tissues and different study groups. LINE-1 was found to be significantly hypomethylated in breast cancer tissue compared to blood. Blood samples of patients with malignant tumors showed slightly lower methylation level, than samples obtained from control group members. Lymphovascular invasion was the only aggressiveness-determining factor that was found to be at least weakly correlated with LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood. We can conclude, that global hypomethylation measured by LINE-1 methylation level is significant in tumor tissue. But there is no significant difference between LINE-1 methylation levels in blood of patients with benign and malignant breast tumors; therefor LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood cannot be used as a marker for early tumor detection. Neither is it valid for determination of tumor behavior.. Methylation is an epigenetic alteration proved to be involved in many disease processes including cancer. This change affects mainly gene promoters and repetitive sequences in genome. Long Interspersed Nuclear Element-1 (LINE-1) is a family of retrotransposons - repetitive elements that modify gene activity and can themselves be targeted by epigenetic mechanisms. LINE-1 methylation level is a surrogate marker for global methylation. In many conditions this parameter is found to be altered not only in affected cell groups, but also throughout other tissues. The aim of our study was to compare LINE-1 methylation pattern in DNA extracted from blood of the patients with benign and malignant breast tissue. In addition, we investigated correlation of LINE-1 methylation in blood and tissues of same patients and relationship of all variables with histopathologic and phenotypic characteristics of tumors. Patients with biopsy-proved ductal invasive carcinoma of breast and no preoperative chemo/radiotherapy were chosen for the study group. Another pool of patients with various benign breast lesions represented controls. Blood samples from both group members were collected preoperatively. Tumor tissue sections were processed for pathology report and part of remaining tissue was used for methylation study. LINE-1 methylation level was quantified using ELISA-based assay. It was analyzed in combination with histologic and phenotypic tumor parameters and compared between different tissues and different study groups. LINE-1 was found to be significantly hypomethylated in breast cancer tissue compared to blood. Blood samples of patients with malignant tumors showed slightly lower methylation level, than samples obtained from control group members. Lymphovascular invasion was the only aggressiveness-determining factor that was found to be at least weakly correlated with LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood. We can conclude, that global hypomethylation measured by LINE-1 methylation level is significant in tumor tissue. But there is no significant difference between LINE-1 methylation levels in blood of patients with benign and malignant breast tumors; therefor LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood cannot be used as a marker for early tumor detection. Neither is it valid for determination of tumor behavior.

Epigenetic changes in breast cancer patients have long been believed to be a promising marker for clinical management - early detection, prognostication, etc. Various approaches are available to test global DNA or target gene methylation status. We used some of them in different tissues of patients with breast cancer to analyze possible links between epigenetic parameters and their value for predicting clinicopathological characteristics (most importantly stage and lymph node status) of tumors. Patients with ductal and lobular invasive carcinoma were included in the study along with age-matched controls. Blood, tumor tissue and normal breast ductal epithelial cells were investigated using MS-HRM technique (for BRCA1 gene promoter methylation assessment), COBRA-PCR (for Alu element methylation quantification) and ELISA-based method (for global DNA methylation estimation). These parameters were analyzed in comparison to clinical, histologic and phenotypic characteristics of the tumors. BRCA1 promoter methylation was detected exclusively in tumor tissues and in only two cases, both of which had aggressive phenotype. Alu and global DNA methylation showed markedly low levels in all tissues of cancer patients compared to healthy controls, with extreme hypomethylation in tumor tissue. Changes in these two parameters were not always concordant. Methylation levels detected in blood showed rather weak relationship with clinicopathological characteristics of tumors. We could conclude that tested parameters are not useful for preoperative determination of tumor stage or lymph node status, neither any other clinicopathological characteristics of tumors. Epigenetics signatures of different tissues of the same patient are not homogenous. Given the uniform picture of DNA methylation in blood in some of investigated groups, additional data and very careful approach are required when considering using it as a diagnostic or predictive tool.. Epigenetic changes in breast cancer patients have long been believed to be a promising marker for clinical management - early detection, prognostication, etc. Various approaches are available to test global DNA or target gene methylation status. We used some of them in different tissues of patients with breast cancer to analyze possible links between epigenetic parameters and their value for predicting clinicopathological characteristics (most importantly stage and lymph node status) of tumors. Patients with ductal and lobular invasive carcinoma were included in the study along with age-matched controls. Blood, tumor tissue and normal breast ductal epithelial cells were investigated using MS-HRM technique (for BRCA1 gene promoter methylation assessment), COBRA-PCR (for Alu element methylation quantification) and ELISA-based method (for global DNA methylation estimation). These parameters were analyzed in comparison to clinical, histologic and phenotypic characteristics of the tumors. BRCA1 promoter methylation was detected exclusively in tumor tissues and in only two cases, both of which had aggressive phenotype. Alu and global DNA methylation showed markedly low levels in all tissues of cancer patients compared to healthy controls, with extreme hypomethylation in tumor tissue. Changes in these two parameters were not always concordant. Methylation levels detected in blood showed rather weak relationship with clinicopathological characteristics of tumors. We could conclude that tested parameters are not useful for preoperative determination of tumor stage or lymph node status, neither any other clinicopathological characteristics of tumors. Epigenetics signatures of different tissues of the same patient are not homogenous. Given the uniform picture of DNA methylation in blood in some of investigated groups, additional data and very careful approach are required when considering using it as a diagnostic or predictive tool.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation mediates gene silencing primarily by inducing repressive chromatin architecture via a common theme of interaction involving methyl-CpG binding (MBD) proteins, histone modifying enzymes and chromatin remodelling complexes. Hence, targeted inhibition of MBD protein function is now considered a potential therapeutic alternative for thwarting DNA hypermethylation prompted neoplastic progress. We have analyzed the gene and protein expression level of the principal factors responsible for gene silencing, that is, DNMT and MBD proteins in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines after treatment with various epigenetic drugs. RESULTS: Our study reveals that the epigenetic modulators affect the expression levels at both transcript and protein levels as well as encourage growth arrest and apoptosis in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. AZA, TSA, SFN, and SAM inhibit cell growth in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines in a dose-dependent manner, that is, with increasing concentrations of drugs the cell viability gradually decreases. All the epigenetic modulators promote apoptotic cell death, as is evident form increased chromatin condensation which is a distinct characteristic of apoptotic cells. From FACS analysis, it is also clear that these drugs induce G2-M arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Further, transcript and protein level expression of MBDs and DNMTs is also affected - after treatment with epigenetic drugs; the level of transcripts/mRNA of MBDs and DNMTs has consistently increased in general. The increase in level of gene expression is substantiated at the protein level also where treated cells show higher expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, and MBD proteins in comparison to untreated cells. In case of tissue samples, the expression of different DNMTs is tissue stage-specific. DNMT1 exhibits significantly higher expression in the metastatic stage, whereas, DNMT3A and DNMT3B have higher expression in the primary stage in comparison to the metastatic samples. CONCLUSION: The epigenetic modulators AZA, TSA, SFN, and SAM may provide opportunities for cancer prevention by regulating the components of epigenetic gene-silencing machinery especially DNMTs and MBDs.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation mediates gene silencing primarily by inducing repressive chromatin architecture via a common theme of interaction involving methyl-CpG binding (MBD) proteins, histone modifying enzymes and chromatin remodelling complexes. Hence, targeted inhibition of MBD protein function is now considered a potential therapeutic alternative for thwarting DNA hypermethylation prompted neoplastic progress. We have analyzed the gene and protein expression level of the principal factors responsible for gene silencing, that is, DNMT and MBD proteins in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines after treatment with various epigenetic drugs. RESULTS: Our study reveals that the epigenetic modulators affect the expression levels at both transcript and protein levels as well as encourage growth arrest and apoptosis in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. AZA, TSA, SFN, and SAM inhibit cell growth in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines in a dose-dependent manner, that is, with increasing concentrations of drugs the cell viability gradually decreases. All the epigenetic modulators promote apoptotic cell death, as is evident form increased chromatin condensation which is a distinct characteristic of apoptotic cells. From FACS analysis, it is also clear that these drugs induce G2-M arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Further, transcript and protein level expression of MBDs and DNMTs is also affected - after treatment with epigenetic drugs; the level of transcripts/mRNA of MBDs and DNMTs has consistently increased in general. The increase in level of gene expression is substantiated at the protein level also where treated cells show higher expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, and MBD proteins in comparison to untreated cells. In case of tissue samples, the expression of different DNMTs is tissue stage-specific. DNMT1 exhibits significantly higher expression in the metastatic stage, whereas, DNMT3A and DNMT3B have higher expression in the primary stage in comparison to the metastatic samples. CONCLUSION: The epigenetic modulators AZA, TSA, SFN, and SAM may provide opportunities for cancer prevention by regulating the components of epigenetic gene-silencing machinery especially DNMTs and MBDs.

BACKGROUND: The insulin-like growth factor binding protein5 (IGFBP5) is often dysregulated in human cancers and considered neither a tumor suppressor nor an oncogene. OBJECTIVE: We aim to examine the reason of the changeable gene regulation of IGFBP5 in the case of methylation in breast cancer. METHODS: We used methyl-specific polymerase (MSP) chain reaction to detect CpG methylation of IGFBP5 promoter and exon-I in breast cancer and adjacent tissues. Gene expression is evaluated by quantative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). RESULTS: IGFBP5 methylation was detected in 24 of 58 (41%) and 54 of 56 (96.5%) promoter and exon-I site respectively in tumor tissues. In adjacent tissues 17 of 58 (29%) and 53 of 56 (96.5%) was methylated. IGFBP5 expression was higher estrogene receptor (ER)(+) than ER(-) patients (p = 0.0549). Beside, we found a positive correlation between the expression of IGFBP5 and G2 tumor grade (p = 0.0131). However, no correlation was observed between IGFBP5 expression and age, menopause or the presence of lymph node metastasis (p > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our results showed that IGFBP5 promoter and exon-I methylation did not have any differences between tumor and adjacent tissues so that IGFBP5 methylation did not change IGFBP5 gene regulation in breast cancer. This is the first study investigating the IGFBP5 gene methylation in breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: The insulin-like growth factor binding protein5 (IGFBP5) is often dysregulated in human cancers and considered neither a tumor suppressor nor an oncogene. OBJECTIVE: We aim to examine the reason of the changeable gene regulation of IGFBP5 in the case of methylation in breast cancer. METHODS: We used methyl-specific polymerase (MSP) chain reaction to detect CpG methylation of IGFBP5 promoter and exon-I in breast cancer and adjacent tissues. Gene expression is evaluated by quantative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). RESULTS: IGFBP5 methylation was detected in 24 of 58 (41%) and 54 of 56 (96.5%) promoter and exon-I site respectively in tumor tissues. In adjacent tissues 17 of 58 (29%) and 53 of 56 (96.5%) was methylated. IGFBP5 expression was higher estrogene receptor (ER)(+) than ER(-) patients (p = 0.0549). Beside, we found a positive correlation between the expression of IGFBP5 and G2 tumor grade (p = 0.0131). However, no correlation was observed between IGFBP5 expression and age, menopause or the presence of lymph node metastasis (p > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our results showed that IGFBP5 promoter and exon-I methylation did not have any differences between tumor and adjacent tissues so that IGFBP5 methylation did not change IGFBP5 gene regulation in breast cancer. This is the first study investigating the IGFBP5 gene methylation in breast cancer.

Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) expression, one of the most important factors regulating ribosome production, is primarily controlled by a CG-rich 45 S rDNA promoter. However, the DNA methylation state of the 45 S rDNA promoter, as well as its effect on rRNA gene expression in types of human cancers is controversial. In the present study we analyzed the methylation status of the rDNA promoter (-380 to +53 bp) as well as associated rRNA expression levels in breast cancer cell lines and breast tumor-normal tissue pairs. We found that the aforementioned regulatory region was extensively methylated (74-96%) in all cell lines and in 68% (13/19 tumor-normal pairs) of the tumors. Expression levels of rRNA transcripts 18 S, 28 S, 5.8 S and 45 S external transcribed spacer (45 S ETS) greatly varied in the breast cancer cell lines regardless of their methylation status. Analyses of rRNA transcript expression levels in the breast tumor and normal matched tissues showed no significant difference when normalized with TBP. On the other hand, using the geometric mean of the rRNA expression values (GM-rRNA) as reference enabled us to identify significant changes in the relative expression of rRNAs in the tissue samples. We propose GM-rRNA normalization as a novel strategy to analyze expression differences between rRNA transcripts. Accordingly, the 18S rRNA/GM-rRNA ratio was significantly higher whereas the 5.8S rRNA/GM-rRNA ratio was significantly lower in breast tumor samples than this ratio in the matched normal samples. Moreover, the 18S rRNA/GM-rRNA ratio was negatively correlated with the 45 S rDNA promoter methylation level in the normal breast tissue samples, yet not in the breast tumors. Significant correlations observed between the expression levels of rRNA transcripts in the normal samples were lost in the tumor samples. We showed that the expression of rRNA transcripts may not be based solely on promoter methylation. Carcinogenesis may cause dysregulation of the correlation between spliced rRNA expression levels, possibly due to changes in rRNA processing, which requires further investigation.. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) expression, one of the most important factors regulating ribosome production, is primarily controlled by a CG-rich 45 S rDNA promoter. However, the DNA methylation state of the 45 S rDNA promoter, as well as its effect on rRNA gene expression in types of human cancers is controversial. In the present study we analyzed the methylation status of the rDNA promoter (-380 to +53 bp) as well as associated rRNA expression levels in breast cancer cell lines and breast tumor-normal tissue pairs. We found that the aforementioned regulatory region was extensively methylated (74-96%) in all cell lines and in 68% (13/19 tumor-normal pairs) of the tumors. Expression levels of rRNA transcripts 18 S, 28 S, 5.8 S and 45 S external transcribed spacer (45 S ETS) greatly varied in the breast cancer cell lines regardless of their methylation status. Analyses of rRNA transcript expression levels in the breast tumor and normal matched tissues showed no significant difference when normalized with TBP. On the other hand, using the geometric mean of the rRNA expression values (GM-rRNA) as reference enabled us to identify significant changes in the relative expression of rRNAs in the tissue samples. We propose GM-rRNA normalization as a novel strategy to analyze expression differences between rRNA transcripts. Accordingly, the 18S rRNA/GM-rRNA ratio was significantly higher whereas the 5.8S rRNA/GM-rRNA ratio was significantly lower in breast tumor samples than this ratio in the matched normal samples. Moreover, the 18S rRNA/GM-rRNA ratio was negatively correlated with the 45 S rDNA promoter methylation level in the normal breast tissue samples, yet not in the breast tumors. Significant correlations observed between the expression levels of rRNA transcripts in the normal samples were lost in the tumor samples. We showed that the expression of rRNA transcripts may not be based solely on promoter methylation. Carcinogenesis may cause dysregulation of the correlation between spliced rRNA expression levels, possibly due to changes in rRNA processing, which requires further investigation.

INTRODUCTION: Epigenetic gene silencing is one of the major causes of inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes in many human cancers. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The aim of the present study was to determine the methylation status of the promoter region CpG islands of four cancer-related genes RASSF1A, RARbeta2, CDH1, and p16 ( INK4a ) in 78 breast cancer specimens and to evaluate whether the methylation status is associated with estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/neu) together with the major clinico-pathological parameters. RESULTS: We showed that the methylation frequencies ranged from 19.6% (p16 ( INK4a )) to 87% (RASSF1A) in primary breast tumors of Tunisian patients. Aberrant methylation of RARbeta2 was observed in 66.6% of cases and associated with age at diagnosis (P = 0.043), while CDH1 was methylated in 47.4% of tumors and was correlated with tumor size (P = 0.013). RASSF1A presented the highest percentage of methylation (87%) and was strongly associated with poor survival (P = 0.014), with age (P = 0.048), and tumor stage (P = 0.033). Loss of ER and PR was strongly associated with GIII tumors (P = 0.000 and 0.037 respectively) while HER2/neu was associated with lymph node involvement (P = 0.026) and 5-year survival rate (P = 0.028). CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings suggested that aberrant methylation of RASSF1A and RARbeta2 occurs frequently in Tunisian breast cancer patients compared with others. Furthermore, RASSF1A hypermethylation could be used as a potential marker of poor prognosis.. INTRODUCTION: Epigenetic gene silencing is one of the major causes of inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes in many human cancers. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The aim of the present study was to determine the methylation status of the promoter region CpG islands of four cancer-related genes RASSF1A, RARbeta2, CDH1, and p16 ( INK4a ) in 78 breast cancer specimens and to evaluate whether the methylation status is associated with estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2/neu) together with the major clinico-pathological parameters. RESULTS: We showed that the methylation frequencies ranged from 19.6% (p16 ( INK4a )) to 87% (RASSF1A) in primary breast tumors of Tunisian patients. Aberrant methylation of RARbeta2 was observed in 66.6% of cases and associated with age at diagnosis (P = 0.043), while CDH1 was methylated in 47.4% of tumors and was correlated with tumor size (P = 0.013). RASSF1A presented the highest percentage of methylation (87%) and was strongly associated with poor survival (P = 0.014), with age (P = 0.048), and tumor stage (P = 0.033). Loss of ER and PR was strongly associated with GIII tumors (P = 0.000 and 0.037 respectively) while HER2/neu was associated with lymph node involvement (P = 0.026) and 5-year survival rate (P = 0.028). CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings suggested that aberrant methylation of RASSF1A and RARbeta2 occurs frequently in Tunisian breast cancer patients compared with others. Furthermore, RASSF1A hypermethylation could be used as a potential marker of poor prognosis.

Inflammation and hormonal signalling induce the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression in solid tumours including breast cancer, which in turn affects cell proliferation, apoptosis and metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of COX-2 and its association with clinical parameters, patient's survival, hormones receptors (oestrogen, progesterone), ERBB2 and TP53 expression in 83 cases of infiltrating ductal breast carcinomas. Moreover, the methylation status at the CpG islands of the COX-2 gene promoter was also explored in 70 specimens. We showed that tumours exhibiting moderate to intense COX-2 immunostaining were significantly more frequent in patients over 45 years old (p = 0.027). Moreover, a high level of COX-2 expression correlated with a shorter survival time (p log-rank = 0.04) and was an independent prognostic factor (p = 0.022; HR 6.4; 95% CI = 1.3-31.4). On the other hand, hypermethylation of the COX-2 gene promoter was observed in 27% of cases and strongly associated with smaller tumours (<5 cm, p = 0.011). Furthermore, patients with methylated COX-2 pattern have a better 4-year disease-free survival (p = 0.022) as well as a prolonged overall survival (p log-rank test = 0.034). In conclusion, we showed that high COX-2 expression was associated with reduced survival and was an independent prognostic factor. However, hypermethylation of the COX-2 promoter correlated with a better overall survival in Tunisian patients with breast carcinoma.. Inflammation and hormonal signalling induce the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression in solid tumours including breast cancer, which in turn affects cell proliferation, apoptosis and metastasis. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of COX-2 and its association with clinical parameters, patient's survival, hormones receptors (oestrogen, progesterone), ERBB2 and TP53 expression in 83 cases of infiltrating ductal breast carcinomas. Moreover, the methylation status at the CpG islands of the COX-2 gene promoter was also explored in 70 specimens. We showed that tumours exhibiting moderate to intense COX-2 immunostaining were significantly more frequent in patients over 45 years old (p = 0.027). Moreover, a high level of COX-2 expression correlated with a shorter survival time (p log-rank = 0.04) and was an independent prognostic factor (p = 0.022; HR 6.4; 95% CI = 1.3-31.4). On the other hand, hypermethylation of the COX-2 gene promoter was observed in 27% of cases and strongly associated with smaller tumours (<5 cm, p = 0.011). Furthermore, patients with methylated COX-2 pattern have a better 4-year disease-free survival (p = 0.022) as well as a prolonged overall survival (p log-rank test = 0.034). In conclusion, we showed that high COX-2 expression was associated with reduced survival and was an independent prognostic factor. However, hypermethylation of the COX-2 promoter correlated with a better overall survival in Tunisian patients with breast carcinoma.

Widespread hypomethylation of DNA and regional hypermethylation, including tumor suppressor regions, have been demonstrated in several human cancers. Since a highly heterogeneous array of genetic anomalies have been associated with breast cancer, we examined several chromosomal hot spots for abnormal methylation patterns. Low-levels of increased methylation of HRAS (11p15) were observed between normal and tumor breast tissue samples from 8 patients. No noticeable variation in methylation was observed with DNA probes from chromosomes 11p15, 1p36, 17q22, 17p13.3 and 3p21 for the 7 ductal breast carcinoma patients, though some variability was observed for a patient with atypical medullary carcinoma. Additionally, the methylation pattern of the estrogen-receptor gene (6q24-27), whose protein product is increased in numerous breast cancers, also did not change. Therefore, as opposed to other cancer types, widespread hypomethylation and regional hypermethylation do not appear to be involved in the early stages of breast cancer and does not account for the molecular heterogeneity of the disease. Proposed alternative mechanisms for the diversity of genetic alterations associated with breast cancer are discussed.. Widespread hypomethylation of DNA and regional hypermethylation, including tumor suppressor regions, have been demonstrated in several human cancers. Since a highly heterogeneous array of genetic anomalies have been associated with breast cancer, we examined several chromosomal hot spots for abnormal methylation patterns. Low-levels of increased methylation of HRAS (11p15) were observed between normal and tumor breast tissue samples from 8 patients. No noticeable variation in methylation was observed with DNA probes from chromosomes 11p15, 1p36, 17q22, 17p13.3 and 3p21 for the 7 ductal breast carcinoma patients, though some variability was observed for a patient with atypical medullary carcinoma. Additionally, the methylation pattern of the estrogen-receptor gene (6q24-27), whose protein product is increased in numerous breast cancers, also did not change. Therefore, as opposed to other cancer types, widespread hypomethylation and regional hypermethylation do not appear to be involved in the early stages of breast cancer and does not account for the molecular heterogeneity of the disease. Proposed alternative mechanisms for the diversity of genetic alterations associated with breast cancer are discussed.

More than one neoplastic founder clone can exist in benign epithelial tumours. Although theories of clonal selection make pluriclonality appear unlikely in carcinomas, published data do not exclude this possibility. This study looked for evidence of multiclonal X inactivation in ovarian carcinoma using AR methylation as a marker. Fifteen unifocal ovarian carcinomas and 14 multifocal carcinomas all in Scottish patients were studied. One representative formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumour block was chosen for each of the former and two for the latter. From each of these 43 tumour blocks three samples each of approximately 10(4) carcinoma cells were obtained by microdissection (129 in all). DNA released by proteinase K digestion was subjected to PCR amplification of the androgen receptor gene AR exon I CAG repeat polymorphism with and without prior digestion with methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes HpaII and HhaI. Complex amplification patterns were consistent with mosaic X inactivation in some ovarian carcinomas but acquired anomalies of AR methylation cannot be excluded. Parallel analysis of other X-linked polymorphic loci would strengthen the inference of clonality status from DNA methylation data in tumour X studies. Strikingly, the number of CAG repeats in the 29 ovarian tumour patients (median 16, range 11 - 20) was substantially fewer than in 34 previously studied breast cancer patients from the same scottish population (median 21, range 14 - 26; P < 0.0001), and women homozygous for the AR CAG repeat were over-represented in the ovarian cancer patients but not in the breast cancer series. These findings reinforce recent suggestions that AR may have a role in ovarian carcinogenesis.. More than one neoplastic founder clone can exist in benign epithelial tumours. Although theories of clonal selection make pluriclonality appear unlikely in carcinomas, published data do not exclude this possibility. This study looked for evidence of multiclonal X inactivation in ovarian carcinoma using AR methylation as a marker. Fifteen unifocal ovarian carcinomas and 14 multifocal carcinomas all in Scottish patients were studied. One representative formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumour block was chosen for each of the former and two for the latter. From each of these 43 tumour blocks three samples each of approximately 10(4) carcinoma cells were obtained by microdissection (129 in all). DNA released by proteinase K digestion was subjected to PCR amplification of the androgen receptor gene AR exon I CAG repeat polymorphism with and without prior digestion with methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes HpaII and HhaI. Complex amplification patterns were consistent with mosaic X inactivation in some ovarian carcinomas but acquired anomalies of AR methylation cannot be excluded. Parallel analysis of other X-linked polymorphic loci would strengthen the inference of clonality status from DNA methylation data in tumour X studies. Strikingly, the number of CAG repeats in the 29 ovarian tumour patients (median 16, range 11 - 20) was substantially fewer than in 34 previously studied breast cancer patients from the same scottish population (median 21, range 14 - 26; P < 0.0001), and women homozygous for the AR CAG repeat were over-represented in the ovarian cancer patients but not in the breast cancer series. These findings reinforce recent suggestions that AR may have a role in ovarian carcinogenesis.

Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. DNA methylations play important roles in cancer development and progression. Formal concept analysis was previously utilized for data mining hypermethylated and hypomethylated genes in breast cancer molecular subtypes in illumina methylation-based microarray database, to laboratory validate their outputs; HS3ST2 (heparan sulfate d-glucosaminyl 3-O-sulfonyl transferase-2) and MUC1 (mucin-1) were retrieved. Both play important roles in progression and invasion of breast cancer. The methylation status of both genes was laboratory validated using methylation-based polymerase chain reaction in breast cancer subtypes luminal A (early stages) and luminal B (late stages) in comparison with benign conditions and normal breast to conclude their roles in tumor invasion and to validate the newly developed algorithm (formal concept analysis). Significant cancer-specific hypermethylation of HS3ST2 was detected in luminal B (chi square = 30.6, p = 0.000), while significant cancer-specific hypomethylation of MUC1 was detected in luminal B (chi square = 30.5, p = 0.001) breast cancer. The median levels of the percentage of methylated allele of both genes were significantly discriminative between luminal A and luminal B subtypes and benign and healthy control groups. Detection of MUC1 and HS3ST2 promoter methylation status appears to be useful molecular markers for assessing the progressive state of the disease and could be helpful in discriminating breast cancer molecular subtypes. These results validate the methylation-based microarray analysis, thus trust their output in the future.. Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. DNA methylations play important roles in cancer development and progression. Formal concept analysis was previously utilized for data mining hypermethylated and hypomethylated genes in breast cancer molecular subtypes in illumina methylation-based microarray database, to laboratory validate their outputs; HS3ST2 (heparan sulfate d-glucosaminyl 3-O-sulfonyl transferase-2) and MUC1 (mucin-1) were retrieved. Both play important roles in progression and invasion of breast cancer. The methylation status of both genes was laboratory validated using methylation-based polymerase chain reaction in breast cancer subtypes luminal A (early stages) and luminal B (late stages) in comparison with benign conditions and normal breast to conclude their roles in tumor invasion and to validate the newly developed algorithm (formal concept analysis). Significant cancer-specific hypermethylation of HS3ST2 was detected in luminal B (chi square = 30.6, p = 0.000), while significant cancer-specific hypomethylation of MUC1 was detected in luminal B (chi square = 30.5, p = 0.001) breast cancer. The median levels of the percentage of methylated allele of both genes were significantly discriminative between luminal A and luminal B subtypes and benign and healthy control groups. Detection of MUC1 and HS3ST2 promoter methylation status appears to be useful molecular markers for assessing the progressive state of the disease and could be helpful in discriminating breast cancer molecular subtypes. These results validate the methylation-based microarray analysis, thus trust their output in the future.

Docetaxel is an effective chemotherapy drug to treat breast cancer but the underlying molecular mechanisms of drug resistance are not fully understood. DNA methylation is an epigenetic event, involved in the control of gene expression, which is known to play an important role in cancer and chemotherapy drug resistance. To investigate the role of DNA methylation in docetaxel resistance in breast cancer we used two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) that were made resistant to docetaxel. Docetaxel-resistant sub-lines were treated with different concentrations of decitabine. Global methylation and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity was measured using an ELISA-based assay. Quantitative real-time PCR was used to study DNMT gene expression. Cell viability was studied by MTT assay. Global methylation was increased in MCF-7 but not significantly changed in MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant cells. Decreased DNMT activity and decreased DNMT1 and DNMT3b mRNA expression was associated with docetaxel resistance in both cell lines. To investigate how the components of the DNA methylation machinery may contribute towards docetaxel resistance, decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine), an inhibitor of DNA methylation, was used. Decitabine treatment decreased global methylation, DNMT activity and DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b mRNA expression in MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant cells. In contrast, decitabine-treated MCF-7 docetaxel-resistant cells showed increased DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b mRNA expression indicating a cell line specific effect of decitabine. Decitabine treatment increased resistance in MCF-7 docetaxel-resistant cells and in the parental MCF-7 and MDA-MB231 docetaxel-sensitive cell lines, however, it did not alter response to docetaxel in MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant cells. This study demonstrates that changes in the DNA methylation machinery are associated with resistance to docetaxel in breast cancer cells. The use of epigenetic therapies, as a strategy to overcome drug resistance, needs to be investigated more fully to determine their effectiveness in different cancers and for different chemotherapy drugs.. Docetaxel is an effective chemotherapy drug to treat breast cancer but the underlying molecular mechanisms of drug resistance are not fully understood. DNA methylation is an epigenetic event, involved in the control of gene expression, which is known to play an important role in cancer and chemotherapy drug resistance. To investigate the role of DNA methylation in docetaxel resistance in breast cancer we used two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) that were made resistant to docetaxel. Docetaxel-resistant sub-lines were treated with different concentrations of decitabine. Global methylation and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity was measured using an ELISA-based assay. Quantitative real-time PCR was used to study DNMT gene expression. Cell viability was studied by MTT assay. Global methylation was increased in MCF-7 but not significantly changed in MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant cells. Decreased DNMT activity and decreased DNMT1 and DNMT3b mRNA expression was associated with docetaxel resistance in both cell lines. To investigate how the components of the DNA methylation machinery may contribute towards docetaxel resistance, decitabine (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine), an inhibitor of DNA methylation, was used. Decitabine treatment decreased global methylation, DNMT activity and DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b mRNA expression in MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant cells. In contrast, decitabine-treated MCF-7 docetaxel-resistant cells showed increased DNMT1, DNMT3a and DNMT3b mRNA expression indicating a cell line specific effect of decitabine. Decitabine treatment increased resistance in MCF-7 docetaxel-resistant cells and in the parental MCF-7 and MDA-MB231 docetaxel-sensitive cell lines, however, it did not alter response to docetaxel in MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant cells. This study demonstrates that changes in the DNA methylation machinery are associated with resistance to docetaxel in breast cancer cells. The use of epigenetic therapies, as a strategy to overcome drug resistance, needs to be investigated more fully to determine their effectiveness in different cancers and for different chemotherapy drugs.

Increasing evidence suggests that dysfunction of histone lysine demethylase is associated with abnormal chromatin remodeling and gene silencing, contributing to breast tumorigenesis. In silico analysis shows that the newly identified histone demethylase lysine-specific demethylase 2 is highly expressed in breast cancer, especially in invasive tumors. However, it is currently unknown how LSD2 regulates chromatin remodeling and gene expression regulation in breast cancer. Using short hairpin RNA, we stably knocked down LSD2 (LSD2-KD) in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. LSD2-KD led to accumulation of H3K4me1/2 without changing methylation levels of other key histone lysine residues, suggesting that LSD2 acts as a bona fide H3K4 demethylase in breast cancer cells. LSD2-KD resulted in decreased colony formation and attenuated global DNA methylation in MDA-MB-231 cells. Additionally, treatment with the DNMT inhibitor, 5-aza-deoxycytidine (DAC), synergistically increased mRNA expression of aberrantly silenced genes important in breast cancer development, including PR, RARbeta, ERalpha, SFRP1, SFRP2, and E-cadherin in LSD2-KD cells. Furthermore, LSD2-KD cells are more susceptible to cell death than scramble controls, and combined treatment with tranylcypromine, an LSD2 inhibitor, and DAC resulted in synergistic growth inhibition of breast cancer cells. DNMT inhibition by DAC in LSD2-KD cells led to internucleosomal DNA fragmentation, enhanced PARP cleavage and increased sub-G1 apoptotic cell population. These results demonstrate an important role for LSD2 in regulation of DNA methylation and gene silencing in breast cancer, and suggest that inhibition of LSD2 in combination with DNA methyltransferase inhibition represents a novel approach for epigenetic therapy of breast cancer.. Increasing evidence suggests that dysfunction of histone lysine demethylase is associated with abnormal chromatin remodeling and gene silencing, contributing to breast tumorigenesis. In silico analysis shows that the newly identified histone demethylase lysine-specific demethylase 2 is highly expressed in breast cancer, especially in invasive tumors. However, it is currently unknown how LSD2 regulates chromatin remodeling and gene expression regulation in breast cancer. Using short hairpin RNA, we stably knocked down LSD2 (LSD2-KD) in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. LSD2-KD led to accumulation of H3K4me1/2 without changing methylation levels of other key histone lysine residues, suggesting that LSD2 acts as a bona fide H3K4 demethylase in breast cancer cells. LSD2-KD resulted in decreased colony formation and attenuated global DNA methylation in MDA-MB-231 cells. Additionally, treatment with the DNMT inhibitor, 5-aza-deoxycytidine (DAC), synergistically increased mRNA expression of aberrantly silenced genes important in breast cancer development, including PR, RARbeta, ERalpha, SFRP1, SFRP2, and E-cadherin in LSD2-KD cells. Furthermore, LSD2-KD cells are more susceptible to cell death than scramble controls, and combined treatment with tranylcypromine, an LSD2 inhibitor, and DAC resulted in synergistic growth inhibition of breast cancer cells. DNMT inhibition by DAC in LSD2-KD cells led to internucleosomal DNA fragmentation, enhanced PARP cleavage and increased sub-G1 apoptotic cell population. These results demonstrate an important role for LSD2 in regulation of DNA methylation and gene silencing in breast cancer, and suggest that inhibition of LSD2 in combination with DNA methyltransferase inhibition represents a novel approach for epigenetic therapy of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Both insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 (IGFBP7) and telomere length (TL) are associated with proliferation and senescence of human breast cancer. This study assessed the clinical significance of both TL and IGFBP7 methylation status in breast cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues. We also investigated whether IGFBP7 methylation status could be affecting TL. METHODS: Telomere length was measured by quantitative PCR to compare tumors with their adjacent normal tissues. The IGFBP7 promoter methylation status was evaluated by methylation-specific PCR and its expression levels were determined by western blotting. RESULTS: Telomeres were shorter in tumor tissues compared to controls (P<.0001). The mean TL was higher in breast cancer with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC; n=72; P=.014) compared with other histological type (n=29), and TL in IDC with HER2 negative (n=53; P=.017) was higher than TL in IDC with HER2 positive (n=19). However, telomeres were shortened in advanced stages and growing tumors. IGFBP7 methylation was observed in 90% of tumor tissues and 59% of controls (P=.0002). Its frequency was significantly higher in IDC compared with invasive mixed carcinoma (IMC; P=.002) and it was not correlated either with protein expression or the other clinicopathological parameters. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that IGFBP7 promoter methylation and shorter TL in tumor compared with adjacent tissues may be predictive biomarkers for breast cancer. Telomere maintenance may be indicative of IDC and IDC with HER2 (-) of breast cancer. Further studies with larger number of cases are necessary to verify this association.. BACKGROUND: Both insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 (IGFBP7) and telomere length (TL) are associated with proliferation and senescence of human breast cancer. This study assessed the clinical significance of both TL and IGFBP7 methylation status in breast cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues. We also investigated whether IGFBP7 methylation status could be affecting TL. METHODS: Telomere length was measured by quantitative PCR to compare tumors with their adjacent normal tissues. The IGFBP7 promoter methylation status was evaluated by methylation-specific PCR and its expression levels were determined by western blotting. RESULTS: Telomeres were shorter in tumor tissues compared to controls (P<.0001). The mean TL was higher in breast cancer with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC; n=72; P=.014) compared with other histological type (n=29), and TL in IDC with HER2 negative (n=53; P=.017) was higher than TL in IDC with HER2 positive (n=19). However, telomeres were shortened in advanced stages and growing tumors. IGFBP7 methylation was observed in 90% of tumor tissues and 59% of controls (P=.0002). Its frequency was significantly higher in IDC compared with invasive mixed carcinoma (IMC; P=.002) and it was not correlated either with protein expression or the other clinicopathological parameters. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that IGFBP7 promoter methylation and shorter TL in tumor compared with adjacent tissues may be predictive biomarkers for breast cancer. Telomere maintenance may be indicative of IDC and IDC with HER2 (-) of breast cancer. Further studies with larger number of cases are necessary to verify this association.

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide. Risk assessment is one of the main services delivered by cancer clinics. Biomarker analysis on different tissues including the peripheral blood can provide crucial information. One of the potential epigenetic biomarkers (epimarkers) is introduced as the peripheral blood DNA methylation pattern. This study was conducted to evaluate the potential value of peripheral blood epimarkers as an accessible tool to predict the risk of breast cancer development. WBC's DNA was the focus of several case-control studies at both genome wide and candidate gene levels to reveal epigenetic changes accounting for predisposition to breast cancer, leading to suggest that ATM, TITF1, SFRP1, NUP155, NEUROD1, ZNF217, DBC2, DOK7 and ESR1 genes and the LINE1, Alu and Sat2 DNA elements could be considered as the potential epimarkers. To address that by which mechanisms WBC's DNA methylation patterns could be linked to the propensity to breast cancer, several contemplations have been offered. Constitutional epimutation during embryonic life, and methylation changes secondary to either environmental exposures or tumor-mediated immune response, are the two main mechanisms. One can deduce that epimarkers based on their potential properties or regulatory impacts on cancer-related genes may be employed for risk prediction, prognosis, and survival inferences that are highly required for breast cancer management toward personalized medicine.. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide. Risk assessment is one of the main services delivered by cancer clinics. Biomarker analysis on different tissues including the peripheral blood can provide crucial information. One of the potential epigenetic biomarkers (epimarkers) is introduced as the peripheral blood DNA methylation pattern. This study was conducted to evaluate the potential value of peripheral blood epimarkers as an accessible tool to predict the risk of breast cancer development. WBC's DNA was the focus of several case-control studies at both genome wide and candidate gene levels to reveal epigenetic changes accounting for predisposition to breast cancer, leading to suggest that ATM, TITF1, SFRP1, NUP155, NEUROD1, ZNF217, DBC2, DOK7 and ESR1 genes and the LINE1, Alu and Sat2 DNA elements could be considered as the potential epimarkers. To address that by which mechanisms WBC's DNA methylation patterns could be linked to the propensity to breast cancer, several contemplations have been offered. Constitutional epimutation during embryonic life, and methylation changes secondary to either environmental exposures or tumor-mediated immune response, are the two main mechanisms. One can deduce that epimarkers based on their potential properties or regulatory impacts on cancer-related genes may be employed for risk prediction, prognosis, and survival inferences that are highly required for breast cancer management toward personalized medicine.

The protein encoded by RAR-beta (retinoic acid receptor) gene is a member of the superfamily, of nuclear receptors of retinoids which are involved in regulation of cell differentiation and proliferation. The level of RAR-beta2 mRNA is downregulated in a number of cell lines derived from human epithelial tumors. Inactivation of the RAR-beta2 gene is associated with methylation of its promoter region, which is observed in various carcinomas at a frequency of 30-70%. In renal and ovarian tumors, methylation at this region is poorly studied, the data being contradictory. We report a high methylation frequency in the gene promoter region in RCC (59%, 36/61) and a somewhat lower frequency in EOC (30%, 15/50). Methylation frequency in BC (46%, 26/56) is consistent with the published data. Significant correlation of methylation frequency in promoter region of RAR-beta2 gene with RCC progression (P < or = 0.005 by Fisher's exact test) was established.. The protein encoded by RAR-beta (retinoic acid receptor) gene is a member of the superfamily, of nuclear receptors of retinoids which are involved in regulation of cell differentiation and proliferation. The level of RAR-beta2 mRNA is downregulated in a number of cell lines derived from human epithelial tumors. Inactivation of the RAR-beta2 gene is associated with methylation of its promoter region, which is observed in various carcinomas at a frequency of 30-70%. In renal and ovarian tumors, methylation at this region is poorly studied, the data being contradictory. We report a high methylation frequency in the gene promoter region in RCC (59%, 36/61) and a somewhat lower frequency in EOC (30%, 15/50). Methylation frequency in BC (46%, 26/56) is consistent with the published data. Significant correlation of methylation frequency in promoter region of RAR-beta2 gene with RCC progression (P < or = 0.005 by Fisher's exact test) was established.

Proton beam therapy has been gaining popularity in the management of a wide spectrum of cancers. However, little is known about the effect of proton beams on epigenetic alterations. In this study, the effects of proton beams on DNA methylation were evaluated in the breast cell lines MCF-10A and MCF-7. Pyrosequencing analysis of the long interspersed element 1 (LINE1) gene indicated that a few specific CpG sites were induced to be hypermethylated by proton beam treatment from 64.5 to 76.5% and from 57.7 to 60.0% (p < 0.05) in MCF-10A and MCF-7, respectively. Genome-wide methylation analysis identified "Developmental Disorder, Hereditary Disorder, Metabolic Disease" as the top network in the MCF-7 cell line. The proliferation rate significantly decreased in proton beam-treated cells, as judged by colony formation and cell proliferation assay. Upon treatment with the proton beam, expression of selected genes (MDH2, STYXL1, CPE, FAM91A1, and GPR37) was significantly changed in accordance with the changes of methylation level. Taken together, the findings demonstrate that proton beam-induced physiological changes of cancer cells via methylation modification assists in establishing the epigenetic basis of proton beam therapy for cancer.. Proton beam therapy has been gaining popularity in the management of a wide spectrum of cancers. However, little is known about the effect of proton beams on epigenetic alterations. In this study, the effects of proton beams on DNA methylation were evaluated in the breast cell lines MCF-10A and MCF-7. Pyrosequencing analysis of the long interspersed element 1 (LINE1) gene indicated that a few specific CpG sites were induced to be hypermethylated by proton beam treatment from 64.5 to 76.5% and from 57.7 to 60.0% (p < 0.05) in MCF-10A and MCF-7, respectively. Genome-wide methylation analysis identified "Developmental Disorder, Hereditary Disorder, Metabolic Disease" as the top network in the MCF-7 cell line. The proliferation rate significantly decreased in proton beam-treated cells, as judged by colony formation and cell proliferation assay. Upon treatment with the proton beam, expression of selected genes (MDH2, STYXL1, CPE, FAM91A1, and GPR37) was significantly changed in accordance with the changes of methylation level. Taken together, the findings demonstrate that proton beam-induced physiological changes of cancer cells via methylation modification assists in establishing the epigenetic basis of proton beam therapy for cancer.

Regulation of gene expression by DNA methylation in gene promoter regions is well studied; however, the effects of methylation in the gene body (exons and introns) on gene expression are comparatively understudied. Recently, hypermethylation has been implicated in the inclusion of alternatively spliced exons; moreover, exon recognition can be enhanced by recruiting the methyl-CpG-binding protein (MeCP2) to hypermethylated sites. This study examines whether the methylation status of an intron is correlated with how frequently the intron is retained during splicing using DNA methylation and RNA sequencing data from breast cancer tissue specimens in The Cancer Genome Atlas. Interestingly, hypomethylation of introns is correlated with higher levels of intron expression in mRNA and the methylation level of an intron is inversely correlated with its retention in mRNA from the gene in which it is located. Furthermore, significant population differences were observed in the methylation level of retained introns. In African-American donors, retained introns were not only less methylated compared to European-American donors, but also were more highly expressed. This underscores the need for understanding epigenetic differences in populations and their correlation with breast cancer is an important step toward achieving personalized cancer care.Implications: This research contributes to the understanding of how epigenetic markers in the gene body communicate with the transcriptional machinery to control transcript diversity and differential biological response to changes in methylation status could underlie some of the known, yet unexplained, disparities in certain breast cancer patient populations. Mol Cancer Res; 16(3); 461-9. (c)2018 AACR.. Regulation of gene expression by DNA methylation in gene promoter regions is well studied; however, the effects of methylation in the gene body (exons and introns) on gene expression are comparatively understudied. Recently, hypermethylation has been implicated in the inclusion of alternatively spliced exons; moreover, exon recognition can be enhanced by recruiting the methyl-CpG-binding protein (MeCP2) to hypermethylated sites. This study examines whether the methylation status of an intron is correlated with how frequently the intron is retained during splicing using DNA methylation and RNA sequencing data from breast cancer tissue specimens in The Cancer Genome Atlas. Interestingly, hypomethylation of introns is correlated with higher levels of intron expression in mRNA and the methylation level of an intron is inversely correlated with its retention in mRNA from the gene in which it is located. Furthermore, significant population differences were observed in the methylation level of retained introns. In African-American donors, retained introns were not only less methylated compared to European-American donors, but also were more highly expressed. This underscores the need for understanding epigenetic differences in populations and their correlation with breast cancer is an important step toward achieving personalized cancer care.Implications: This research contributes to the understanding of how epigenetic markers in the gene body communicate with the transcriptional machinery to control transcript diversity and differential biological response to changes in methylation status could underlie some of the known, yet unexplained, disparities in certain breast cancer patient populations. Mol Cancer Res; 16(3); 461-9. (c)2018 AACR.

Raf kinase inhibitor protein's (RKIP) downregulation can predict poor outcome in patients with various types of malignancy. In this study, we aimed to assess the potential involvement of RKIP in breast carcinogenesis and to evaluate its association with outcome variables and aberrant promoter methylation in breast carcinoma (BC). Tissue microarray sections were immunostained for RKIP in 26 normal breasts, 25 usual ductal hyperplasia, 76 ductal carcinoma in situ, and 198 BC specimens. The methylation status of RKIP was also determined in BC. In addition, the mRNA and protein level of RKIP was analyzed in 8 pairs of BC tissues and surrounding normal tissues by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis, respectively. RKIP mRNA and protein expression was significantly downregulated in BC tissues compared with the surrounding normal tissues (P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively). Reduced RKIP expression seemed to increase progressively from normal breast to BC (P<0.001). Reduced RKIP expression was significantly associated with metastatic relapse (P<0.001) and was identified as an independent adverse prognostic indicator for disease-free survival (P=0.003). Reduced RKIP expression in BC was significantly correlated with its aberrant promoter methylation (P<0.05). In conclusion, downregulation of RKIP plays an important role in the breast neoplastic progression and correlates with poor prognosis in patients with BC. Aberrant RKIP methylation is one of the mechanisms that lead to downregulation of RKIP in BC.. Raf kinase inhibitor protein's (RKIP) downregulation can predict poor outcome in patients with various types of malignancy. In this study, we aimed to assess the potential involvement of RKIP in breast carcinogenesis and to evaluate its association with outcome variables and aberrant promoter methylation in breast carcinoma (BC). Tissue microarray sections were immunostained for RKIP in 26 normal breasts, 25 usual ductal hyperplasia, 76 ductal carcinoma in situ, and 198 BC specimens. The methylation status of RKIP was also determined in BC. In addition, the mRNA and protein level of RKIP was analyzed in 8 pairs of BC tissues and surrounding normal tissues by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis, respectively. RKIP mRNA and protein expression was significantly downregulated in BC tissues compared with the surrounding normal tissues (P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively). Reduced RKIP expression seemed to increase progressively from normal breast to BC (P<0.001). Reduced RKIP expression was significantly associated with metastatic relapse (P<0.001) and was identified as an independent adverse prognostic indicator for disease-free survival (P=0.003). Reduced RKIP expression in BC was significantly correlated with its aberrant promoter methylation (P<0.05). In conclusion, downregulation of RKIP plays an important role in the breast neoplastic progression and correlates with poor prognosis in patients with BC. Aberrant RKIP methylation is one of the mechanisms that lead to downregulation of RKIP in BC.

Many cancer-related genes are regulated by an epigenetic mechanism through modification of the methylation status of CpG sites at the promoter. This study was carried out at a genome-wide scale to mine genes in which the methylation of CpG sites is altered in breast cancer tissues. Differential methylation hybridization analysis was conducted using a chromosomal DNA mixture of ten normal and cancer tissue sets. A CpG microarray harboring 237,220 CpG sites of the whole genome was interrogated and the resulting methylation level differences, as well as the RNA expression differences, between the normal and cancer sets for selected genes were verified in breast cell lines by methylation-specific PCR and real-time PCR analyses. As a result, we identified and verified novel genes that were hypermethylated in breast cancer, such as NRN1, CA5B and RPIA. Pathway analysis of the genes with altered methylation patterns identified the involvement of a differentiation-related network of genes whose activity may be heavily regulated by STAT1 in breast tumorigenesis. Our results suggest that epigenetic dysregulation of cellular processes relevant to STAT1-dependent cellular differentiation may be intimately involved in breast carcinogenesis. These findings lend credence to the possibility of using tumor-specific alterations in methylation patterns as biomarkers in estimating prognosis and assessing treatment options for breast cancer.. Many cancer-related genes are regulated by an epigenetic mechanism through modification of the methylation status of CpG sites at the promoter. This study was carried out at a genome-wide scale to mine genes in which the methylation of CpG sites is altered in breast cancer tissues. Differential methylation hybridization analysis was conducted using a chromosomal DNA mixture of ten normal and cancer tissue sets. A CpG microarray harboring 237,220 CpG sites of the whole genome was interrogated and the resulting methylation level differences, as well as the RNA expression differences, between the normal and cancer sets for selected genes were verified in breast cell lines by methylation-specific PCR and real-time PCR analyses. As a result, we identified and verified novel genes that were hypermethylated in breast cancer, such as NRN1, CA5B and RPIA. Pathway analysis of the genes with altered methylation patterns identified the involvement of a differentiation-related network of genes whose activity may be heavily regulated by STAT1 in breast tumorigenesis. Our results suggest that epigenetic dysregulation of cellular processes relevant to STAT1-dependent cellular differentiation may be intimately involved in breast carcinogenesis. These findings lend credence to the possibility of using tumor-specific alterations in methylation patterns as biomarkers in estimating prognosis and assessing treatment options for breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been considered a risk factor for suicidality. BDNF secretion is influenced by epigenetic (DNA methylation) and genetic (val66met polymorphism) profiles. We aimed to investigate the independent effects of BDNF promoter methylation status on suicidal ideation as well as the effects of its interaction with the val66met polymorphism in patients with breast cancer. METHODS: A total of279 patients with breast cancer were evaluated 1 week after breast surgery, and 244 (87%) were followed up 1 year later. Suicidal ideation was identified using the item addressing suicidal thoughts on the Beck Depression Inventory. The independent effects of BDNF methylation status on suicidal ideation at two points was investigated using multivariable logistic regression models. The two-way interactive effects of BDNF methylation status and the val66met polymorphism on suicidal ideation were also estimated using the same models. RESULTS: Increased BDNF methylation was significantly associated with suicidal ideation and depression 1 year after breast surgery, and this association was independent of potential covariates, including previous depression, current depressive symptoms, and BDNF genotype. No significant methylation-genotype interactions were found. CONCLUSIONS: The BDNF hypothesis and the epigenetic origin of suicidality in patients with breast cancer were supported. BDNF gene methylation status may be a biological marker for suicidality in patients with breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has been considered a risk factor for suicidality. BDNF secretion is influenced by epigenetic (DNA methylation) and genetic (val66met polymorphism) profiles. We aimed to investigate the independent effects of BDNF promoter methylation status on suicidal ideation as well as the effects of its interaction with the val66met polymorphism in patients with breast cancer. METHODS: A total of279 patients with breast cancer were evaluated 1 week after breast surgery, and 244 (87%) were followed up 1 year later. Suicidal ideation was identified using the item addressing suicidal thoughts on the Beck Depression Inventory. The independent effects of BDNF methylation status on suicidal ideation at two points was investigated using multivariable logistic regression models. The two-way interactive effects of BDNF methylation status and the val66met polymorphism on suicidal ideation were also estimated using the same models. RESULTS: Increased BDNF methylation was significantly associated with suicidal ideation and depression 1 year after breast surgery, and this association was independent of potential covariates, including previous depression, current depressive symptoms, and BDNF genotype. No significant methylation-genotype interactions were found. CONCLUSIONS: The BDNF hypothesis and the epigenetic origin of suicidality in patients with breast cancer were supported. BDNF gene methylation status may be a biological marker for suicidality in patients with breast cancer.

The pathogenesis of breast cancer involves multiple genetic and epigenetic events. In this study, we report an epigenetic alteration of DFNA5 in human breast cancer. DFNA5 gene was silenced in breast cancer cell lines that were methylated in the DFNA5 promoter, and restored by treatment with the demethylating agent, 5-aza-dC, and gene knock-down of DFNA5 increased cellular invasiveness in vitro. The mRNA expression of DFNA5 in breast cancer tissues was down-regulated as compared to normal tissues. Moreover, the DFNA5 promoter was found to be methylated in primary tumor tissues with high frequency (53%, 18/34). Quantitative methylation-specific PCR of DFNA5 clearly discriminated primary breast cancer tissues from normal breast tissues (15.3%, 2/13). Moreover, methylation status of DFNA5 was correlated with lymph node metastasis in breast cancer patients. Our data implicate DFNA5 promoter methylation as a novel molecular biomarker in human breast cancer.. The pathogenesis of breast cancer involves multiple genetic and epigenetic events. In this study, we report an epigenetic alteration of DFNA5 in human breast cancer. DFNA5 gene was silenced in breast cancer cell lines that were methylated in the DFNA5 promoter, and restored by treatment with the demethylating agent, 5-aza-dC, and gene knock-down of DFNA5 increased cellular invasiveness in vitro. The mRNA expression of DFNA5 in breast cancer tissues was down-regulated as compared to normal tissues. Moreover, the DFNA5 promoter was found to be methylated in primary tumor tissues with high frequency (53%, 18/34). Quantitative methylation-specific PCR of DFNA5 clearly discriminated primary breast cancer tissues from normal breast tissues (15.3%, 2/13). Moreover, methylation status of DFNA5 was correlated with lymph node metastasis in breast cancer patients. Our data implicate DFNA5 promoter methylation as a novel molecular biomarker in human breast cancer.

Aberrant DNA methylation occurs early and frequently in tumorigenesis. Identification of DNA methylation biomarkers is a field that provides potential for improving the clinical process of breast cancer diagnosis. We utilized a genome-wide technique, methylated DNA isolation assay (MeDIA), in combination with high-resolution CpG microarray analysis to identify hypermethylated genes in breast cancer. Among differentially methylated genes between tumor and adjacent normal tissues, 3 candidate genes (LHX2, WT1 and OTP) were finally selected through a step-wise filtering process and examined for methylation status in normal tissues, primary tumor, and paired adjacent normal-appearing tissues from 39 breast cancer patients. Based on the calculated cut-off values, all genes showed significantly higher frequencies of aberrant hypermethylation in primary tumors (43.6% for LHX2, 89.7% for WT1 and 100% for OTP, p<0.05) while frequencies were intermediate in paired adjacent normal tissues and absent in normal tissues. On further analysis, the methylation level in primary tumors was not significantly correlated with clinicopathological features. Interestingly, DNA methylation of a novel gene OTP was detected in adjacent normal tissues even 6 cm away from primary tumors, suggesting that OTP methylation may qualify as a biomarker for the early detection of breast cancer. In conclusion, we successfully identified a novel gene OTP frequently methylated in breast cancer by genome-wide screening. Our results suggest that the OTP gene may play a crucial role in breast carcinogenesis, although further clinical validation will be needed to evaluate the potential application of OTP in the early detection of breast cancer.. Aberrant DNA methylation occurs early and frequently in tumorigenesis. Identification of DNA methylation biomarkers is a field that provides potential for improving the clinical process of breast cancer diagnosis. We utilized a genome-wide technique, methylated DNA isolation assay (MeDIA), in combination with high-resolution CpG microarray analysis to identify hypermethylated genes in breast cancer. Among differentially methylated genes between tumor and adjacent normal tissues, 3 candidate genes (LHX2, WT1 and OTP) were finally selected through a step-wise filtering process and examined for methylation status in normal tissues, primary tumor, and paired adjacent normal-appearing tissues from 39 breast cancer patients. Based on the calculated cut-off values, all genes showed significantly higher frequencies of aberrant hypermethylation in primary tumors (43.6% for LHX2, 89.7% for WT1 and 100% for OTP, p<0.05) while frequencies were intermediate in paired adjacent normal tissues and absent in normal tissues. On further analysis, the methylation level in primary tumors was not significantly correlated with clinicopathological features. Interestingly, DNA methylation of a novel gene OTP was detected in adjacent normal tissues even 6 cm away from primary tumors, suggesting that OTP methylation may qualify as a biomarker for the early detection of breast cancer. In conclusion, we successfully identified a novel gene OTP frequently methylated in breast cancer by genome-wide screening. Our results suggest that the OTP gene may play a crucial role in breast carcinogenesis, although further clinical validation will be needed to evaluate the potential application of OTP in the early detection of breast cancer.

gamma-Glutamyl hydrolase (GGH) plays an important role in folate homeostasis by catalyzing hydrolysis of polyglutamylated folate into monoglutamates. Polyglutamylated folates are better substrates for several enzymes involved in the generation of S-adenosylmethionine, the primary methyl group donor, and hence, GGH modulation may affect DNA methylation. DNA methylation is an important epigenetic determinant in gene expression, in the maintenance of DNA integrity and stability, and in chromatin modifications, and aberrant or dysregulation of DNA methylation has been mechanistically linked to the development of human diseases including cancer. Using a recently developed in vitro model of GGH modulation in HCT116 colon and MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells, we investigated whether GGH modulation would affect global and gene-specific DNA methylation and whether these alterations were associated with significant gene expression changes. In both cell lines, GGH overexpression decreased global DNA methylation and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity, while GGH inhibition increased global DNA methylation and DNMT activity. Epigenomic and gene expression analyses revealed that GGH modulation influenced CpG promoter DNA methylation and gene expression involved in important biological pathways including cell cycle, cellular development, and cellular growth and proliferation. Some of the observed altered gene expression appeared to be regulated by changes in CpG promoter DNA methylation. Our data suggest that the GGH modulation-induced changes in total intracellular folate concentrations and content of long-chain folylpolyglutamates are associated with functionally significant DNA methylation alterations in several important biological pathways.. gamma-Glutamyl hydrolase (GGH) plays an important role in folate homeostasis by catalyzing hydrolysis of polyglutamylated folate into monoglutamates. Polyglutamylated folates are better substrates for several enzymes involved in the generation of S-adenosylmethionine, the primary methyl group donor, and hence, GGH modulation may affect DNA methylation. DNA methylation is an important epigenetic determinant in gene expression, in the maintenance of DNA integrity and stability, and in chromatin modifications, and aberrant or dysregulation of DNA methylation has been mechanistically linked to the development of human diseases including cancer. Using a recently developed in vitro model of GGH modulation in HCT116 colon and MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells, we investigated whether GGH modulation would affect global and gene-specific DNA methylation and whether these alterations were associated with significant gene expression changes. In both cell lines, GGH overexpression decreased global DNA methylation and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity, while GGH inhibition increased global DNA methylation and DNMT activity. Epigenomic and gene expression analyses revealed that GGH modulation influenced CpG promoter DNA methylation and gene expression involved in important biological pathways including cell cycle, cellular development, and cellular growth and proliferation. Some of the observed altered gene expression appeared to be regulated by changes in CpG promoter DNA methylation. Our data suggest that the GGH modulation-induced changes in total intracellular folate concentrations and content of long-chain folylpolyglutamates are associated with functionally significant DNA methylation alterations in several important biological pathways.

Folylpolyglutamate synthase (FPGS) plays a critical role in intracellular folate homeostasis. FPGS-induced polyglutamylated folates are better substrates for several enzymes involved in the generation of S-adenosylmethionine, the primary methyl group donor, and hence FPGS modulation may affect DNA methylation. DNA methylation is an important epigenetic determinant in gene expression and aberrant DNA methylation is mechanistically linked cancer development. We investigated whether FPGS modulation would affect global and gene-specific promoter DNA methylation with consequent functional effects on gene expression profiles in HCT116 colon and MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells. Although FPGS modulation altered global DNA methylation and DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) activity, the effects of FPGS modulation on global DNA methylation and DNMT activity could not be solely explained by intracellular folate concentrations and content of long-chain folylpolyglutamates, and it may be cell-specific. FPGS modulation influenced differential gene expression and promoter cytosine-guanine dinucleotide sequences (CpG) DNA methylation involved in cellular development, cell cycle, cell death and molecular transport. Some of the altered gene expression was associated with promoter CpG DNA methylation changes. In both the FPGS-overexpressed HCT116 and MDA-MB-435 cell lines, we identified several differentially expressed genes involved in folate biosynthesis and one-carbon metabolism, which might in part have contributed to the observed increased efficacy of 5-fluorouracil in response to FPGS overexpression. Our data suggest that FPGS modulation affects global and promoter CpG DNA methylation and expression of several genes involved in important biological pathways. The potential role of FPGS modulation in DNA methylation and its associated downstream functional effects warrants further studies.. Folylpolyglutamate synthase (FPGS) plays a critical role in intracellular folate homeostasis. FPGS-induced polyglutamylated folates are better substrates for several enzymes involved in the generation of S-adenosylmethionine, the primary methyl group donor, and hence FPGS modulation may affect DNA methylation. DNA methylation is an important epigenetic determinant in gene expression and aberrant DNA methylation is mechanistically linked cancer development. We investigated whether FPGS modulation would affect global and gene-specific promoter DNA methylation with consequent functional effects on gene expression profiles in HCT116 colon and MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells. Although FPGS modulation altered global DNA methylation and DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) activity, the effects of FPGS modulation on global DNA methylation and DNMT activity could not be solely explained by intracellular folate concentrations and content of long-chain folylpolyglutamates, and it may be cell-specific. FPGS modulation influenced differential gene expression and promoter cytosine-guanine dinucleotide sequences (CpG) DNA methylation involved in cellular development, cell cycle, cell death and molecular transport. Some of the altered gene expression was associated with promoter CpG DNA methylation changes. In both the FPGS-overexpressed HCT116 and MDA-MB-435 cell lines, we identified several differentially expressed genes involved in folate biosynthesis and one-carbon metabolism, which might in part have contributed to the observed increased efficacy of 5-fluorouracil in response to FPGS overexpression. Our data suggest that FPGS modulation affects global and promoter CpG DNA methylation and expression of several genes involved in important biological pathways. The potential role of FPGS modulation in DNA methylation and its associated downstream functional effects warrants further studies.

The biological mechanisms underlying resistance to tamoxifen are of considerable clinical significance. However, little is known about the correlation between tamoxifen resistance and methylation of genes related to drug-metabolizing enzymes. To address this issue, we examined the methylation pattern and expression of the selected genes coding for drug-metabolizing enzymes, including COMT, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, NAT1, and SULT1A1 in tamoxifen-resistant and control breast cancers. Bisulfite genomic sequencing and methylation-specific PCR were carried out to evaluate the methylation patterns of the five genes from control (n = 74) and tamoxifen-resistant tissues (n = 37) chosen by an age-matched sampling method. Also, end-point reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and real-time RT-PCR were performed to determine RNA expression of the genes. Bisulfite genomic sequencing revealed methylation of the NAT1 gene in 25 of the control cancers (33.8%) and 23 of the resistant tumors (62.2%). Of the five genes, only NAT1 showed a significant lower methylation rate in the control group than in the resistant group (p = 0.004). No significant difference of the methylation rate was found in the other four genes including COMT, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, and SULT1A1 (p > 0.05). Furthermore, the expression rate of NAT1 mRNA was lower in the tumors from the resistant group than in control tumors (28.6% vs. 65.2%, p = 0.031). Real-time RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the NAT1 gene was more down-regulated in resistant tissues than in control group (p = 0.023). Moreover, malignant cells from the resistant cases demonstrated a higher percentage of positive staining for Ki67 (p = 0.001) and cyclin D1 (p = 0.043) than those from the control group. Taken together, the higher methylation rate of the NAT1 gene is related to tamoxifen resistance, and this fact supports the hypothesis that hypermethylation of the NAT1 gene might affect the initiation of tamoxifen resistance.. The biological mechanisms underlying resistance to tamoxifen are of considerable clinical significance. However, little is known about the correlation between tamoxifen resistance and methylation of genes related to drug-metabolizing enzymes. To address this issue, we examined the methylation pattern and expression of the selected genes coding for drug-metabolizing enzymes, including COMT, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, NAT1, and SULT1A1 in tamoxifen-resistant and control breast cancers. Bisulfite genomic sequencing and methylation-specific PCR were carried out to evaluate the methylation patterns of the five genes from control (n = 74) and tamoxifen-resistant tissues (n = 37) chosen by an age-matched sampling method. Also, end-point reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and real-time RT-PCR were performed to determine RNA expression of the genes. Bisulfite genomic sequencing revealed methylation of the NAT1 gene in 25 of the control cancers (33.8%) and 23 of the resistant tumors (62.2%). Of the five genes, only NAT1 showed a significant lower methylation rate in the control group than in the resistant group (p = 0.004). No significant difference of the methylation rate was found in the other four genes including COMT, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, and SULT1A1 (p > 0.05). Furthermore, the expression rate of NAT1 mRNA was lower in the tumors from the resistant group than in control tumors (28.6% vs. 65.2%, p = 0.031). Real-time RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the NAT1 gene was more down-regulated in resistant tissues than in control group (p = 0.023). Moreover, malignant cells from the resistant cases demonstrated a higher percentage of positive staining for Ki67 (p = 0.001) and cyclin D1 (p = 0.043) than those from the control group. Taken together, the higher methylation rate of the NAT1 gene is related to tamoxifen resistance, and this fact supports the hypothesis that hypermethylation of the NAT1 gene might affect the initiation of tamoxifen resistance.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands is known to be responsible for the alteration and silencing of genes in cancer. The data presented here describes that the CpG methylations of ERalpha and ERbeta are found in breast cancer tissues, and methylation exerts a considerable effect on gene silencing, investigated by bisulfite genomic sequencing and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Consequently, hypermethylation of the ERalpha and ERbeta genes was found in 66.0% and 50.0% of 50 breast cancers, respectively. Eleven of 50 samples (22.0%) did not show any methylation of either ERalpha or ERbeta, whereas 19 samples (38.0%) showed methylation of both ERalpha and ERbeta. The tumors that showed aberrant methylation of ERalpha and ERbeta did not express mRNA, compared with unmethylated cases (p < 0.01). The methylated case was negatively correlated with the expression of the ERalpha protein (p < 0.01). In addition, ERbeta methylation demonstrated significant associations with the lower level of Ki67 (9.36 +/- 2.43 versus 19.68 +/- 3.42, p = 0.02). Although the number of samples was relatively small, our results suggest that DNA methylation in ERalpha and ERbeta are present in breast cancer tissue, and that the methylation causes a significant effect on transcriptional silencing. Furthermore, the CpG methylation of the ERbeta gene seems to play a role in cell proliferation of breast cancer tissue.. Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands is known to be responsible for the alteration and silencing of genes in cancer. The data presented here describes that the CpG methylations of ERalpha and ERbeta are found in breast cancer tissues, and methylation exerts a considerable effect on gene silencing, investigated by bisulfite genomic sequencing and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Consequently, hypermethylation of the ERalpha and ERbeta genes was found in 66.0% and 50.0% of 50 breast cancers, respectively. Eleven of 50 samples (22.0%) did not show any methylation of either ERalpha or ERbeta, whereas 19 samples (38.0%) showed methylation of both ERalpha and ERbeta. The tumors that showed aberrant methylation of ERalpha and ERbeta did not express mRNA, compared with unmethylated cases (p < 0.01). The methylated case was negatively correlated with the expression of the ERalpha protein (p < 0.01). In addition, ERbeta methylation demonstrated significant associations with the lower level of Ki67 (9.36 +/- 2.43 versus 19.68 +/- 3.42, p = 0.02). Although the number of samples was relatively small, our results suggest that DNA methylation in ERalpha and ERbeta are present in breast cancer tissue, and that the methylation causes a significant effect on transcriptional silencing. Furthermore, the CpG methylation of the ERbeta gene seems to play a role in cell proliferation of breast cancer tissue.

BACKGROUND: Integrative analysis on multi-omics data has gained much attention recently. To investigate the interactive effect of gene expression and DNA methylation on cancer, we propose a directed random walk-based approach on an integrated gene-gene graph that is guided by pathway information. METHODS: Our approach first extracts a single pathway profile matrix out of the gene expression and DNA methylation data by performing the random walk over the integrated graph. We then apply a denoising autoencoder to the pathway profile to further identify important pathway features and genes. The extracted features are validated in the survival prediction task for breast cancer patients. RESULTS: The results show that the proposed method substantially improves the survival prediction performance compared to that of other pathway-based prediction methods, revealing that the combined effect of gene expression and methylation data is well reflected in the integrated gene-gene graph combined with pathway information. Furthermore, we show that our joint analysis on the methylation features and gene expression profile identifies cancer-specific pathways with genes related to breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we proposed a DRW-based method on an integrated gene-gene graph with expression and methylation profiles in order to utilize the interactions between them. The results showed that the constructed integrated gene-gene graph can successfully reflect the combined effect of methylation features on gene expression profiles. We also found that the selected features by DA can effectively extract topologically important pathways and genes specifically related to breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Integrative analysis on multi-omics data has gained much attention recently. To investigate the interactive effect of gene expression and DNA methylation on cancer, we propose a directed random walk-based approach on an integrated gene-gene graph that is guided by pathway information. METHODS: Our approach first extracts a single pathway profile matrix out of the gene expression and DNA methylation data by performing the random walk over the integrated graph. We then apply a denoising autoencoder to the pathway profile to further identify important pathway features and genes. The extracted features are validated in the survival prediction task for breast cancer patients. RESULTS: The results show that the proposed method substantially improves the survival prediction performance compared to that of other pathway-based prediction methods, revealing that the combined effect of gene expression and methylation data is well reflected in the integrated gene-gene graph combined with pathway information. Furthermore, we show that our joint analysis on the methylation features and gene expression profile identifies cancer-specific pathways with genes related to breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we proposed a DRW-based method on an integrated gene-gene graph with expression and methylation profiles in order to utilize the interactions between them. The results showed that the constructed integrated gene-gene graph can successfully reflect the combined effect of methylation features on gene expression profiles. We also found that the selected features by DA can effectively extract topologically important pathways and genes specifically related to breast cancer.

Dietary agents with chemopreventive potential, including soy-derived genistein and tomato-derived lycopene, have been shown to alter gene expression in ways that can either promote or potentially inhibit the carcinogenic processes. To begin to explore the mechanisms by which these agents may be acting we have examined the DNA methylation modulating capacity of genistein or lycopene for several genes relevant to breast cancer in the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468, as well as in immortalized but noncancer fibrocystic MCF10A breast cells. We find using methylation specific PCR (MSP) that a low, nontoxic concentration of genistein (3.125 microM, resupplemented every 48 hr for 1 week) or a single dose of lycopene (2 microM) partially demethylates the promoter of the GSTP1 tumor suppressor gene in MDA-MB-468 cells. RT-PCR studies confirm a lack of GSTP1 expression in untreated MDA-MB-468, with restoration of GSTP1 expression after genistein or lycopene treatment. The RARbeta2 gene however, was not demethylated by genistein or lycopene in either of these breast cancer cell lines. But, lycopene (2 microM, once per week for 2 weeks) did induce demethylation of RARbeta2 and the HIN-1 genes in the noncancer MCF10A fibrocystic breast cells. These data show for the first time that the tomato carotenoid lycopene has direct DNA demethylating activity. In summary, both genistein and lycopene, at very low, dietarily relevant concentrations can potentially mitigate tumorigenic processes via promoter methylation modulation of gene expression.. Dietary agents with chemopreventive potential, including soy-derived genistein and tomato-derived lycopene, have been shown to alter gene expression in ways that can either promote or potentially inhibit the carcinogenic processes. To begin to explore the mechanisms by which these agents may be acting we have examined the DNA methylation modulating capacity of genistein or lycopene for several genes relevant to breast cancer in the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468, as well as in immortalized but noncancer fibrocystic MCF10A breast cells. We find using methylation specific PCR (MSP) that a low, nontoxic concentration of genistein (3.125 microM, resupplemented every 48 hr for 1 week) or a single dose of lycopene (2 microM) partially demethylates the promoter of the GSTP1 tumor suppressor gene in MDA-MB-468 cells. RT-PCR studies confirm a lack of GSTP1 expression in untreated MDA-MB-468, with restoration of GSTP1 expression after genistein or lycopene treatment. The RARbeta2 gene however, was not demethylated by genistein or lycopene in either of these breast cancer cell lines. But, lycopene (2 microM, once per week for 2 weeks) did induce demethylation of RARbeta2 and the HIN-1 genes in the noncancer MCF10A fibrocystic breast cells. These data show for the first time that the tomato carotenoid lycopene has direct DNA demethylating activity. In summary, both genistein and lycopene, at very low, dietarily relevant concentrations can potentially mitigate tumorigenic processes via promoter methylation modulation of gene expression.

The methylation status of cystatin M (CST6) gene in breast tumors was investigated and its prognostic significance as a novel breast cancer biomarker was evaluated. Using methylation-specific PCR (MSP), CST6 promoter methylation was examined in 134 formalin fixed paraffin-embedded tissues (FFPEs): 10 pairs of breast tumors and their surrounding normal tissues, 10 breast fibroadenomas, 11 normal breast tissues and 93 breast tumors. Methylation of CST6 promoter was observed in 2/21 (9.5%) noncancerous breast tissues, 1/10 (10%) benign breast tumors (fibroadenomas) and 52 (55.9%) operable breast cancer tumor samples. CST6 was rarely methylated in the normal tissue surrounding the tumor (10%). During the follow-up period, 24 (25.8%) patients relapsed and 19 (20.4%) died. CST6 methylation was detected in 19 (79.2%) of patients who relapsed and in 15 (78.9%) of patients who died. Disease-free-interval (DFI) and overall survival (OS) were significantly associated with CST6 promoter methylation (p=0.004 and p=0.001 respectively). Multivariate analysis revealed that CST6 methylation is an independent prognostic factor for DFI (HR=3.484; 95% CI: 1.155-10.511; p=0.027). and OS (HR=9.190; 95% CI: 1.989-42.454; p=0.004). CST6 promoter methylation status in tumor cells seems to provide important prognostic information in operable breast cancer and merits to be further evaluated and validated in a larger cohort of patients.. The methylation status of cystatin M (CST6) gene in breast tumors was investigated and its prognostic significance as a novel breast cancer biomarker was evaluated. Using methylation-specific PCR (MSP), CST6 promoter methylation was examined in 134 formalin fixed paraffin-embedded tissues (FFPEs): 10 pairs of breast tumors and their surrounding normal tissues, 10 breast fibroadenomas, 11 normal breast tissues and 93 breast tumors. Methylation of CST6 promoter was observed in 2/21 (9.5%) noncancerous breast tissues, 1/10 (10%) benign breast tumors (fibroadenomas) and 52 (55.9%) operable breast cancer tumor samples. CST6 was rarely methylated in the normal tissue surrounding the tumor (10%). During the follow-up period, 24 (25.8%) patients relapsed and 19 (20.4%) died. CST6 methylation was detected in 19 (79.2%) of patients who relapsed and in 15 (78.9%) of patients who died. Disease-free-interval (DFI) and overall survival (OS) were significantly associated with CST6 promoter methylation (p=0.004 and p=0.001 respectively). Multivariate analysis revealed that CST6 methylation is an independent prognostic factor for DFI (HR=3.484; 95% CI: 1.155-10.511; p=0.027). and OS (HR=9.190; 95% CI: 1.989-42.454; p=0.004). CST6 promoter methylation status in tumor cells seems to provide important prognostic information in operable breast cancer and merits to be further evaluated and validated in a larger cohort of patients.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to evaluate the prognostic significance of RASSF1A promoter methylation status in operable breast cancer. DESIGN AND METHODS: By using Methylation Specific PCR, we evaluated the specificity of RASSF1A promoter methylation in 10 breast tumors and matching normal tissues, 10 breast fibroadenomas and 11 normal breast tissues. The prognostic significance of RASSF1A methylation was validated in 93 formalin fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues obtained from patients with operable breast cancer. RESULTS: Methylation of RASSF1A promoter was observed in 1/31 (3.2%) non-cancerous breast tissues and 53/93 (57.0%) early stage breast tumors. The only positive sample in the non-cancerous breast tissues group was found in a histological normal tissue surrounding the tumor. During the follow-up period, 24/93 (25.8%) patients relapsed and 19/93 (20.4%) died. Disease-Free-Interval (DFI) was significantly associated with RASSF1A methylation (p=0.028). CONCLUSIONS: RASSF1A promoter methylation provides important prognostic information in early stage breast cancer patients.. OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to evaluate the prognostic significance of RASSF1A promoter methylation status in operable breast cancer. DESIGN AND METHODS: By using Methylation Specific PCR, we evaluated the specificity of RASSF1A promoter methylation in 10 breast tumors and matching normal tissues, 10 breast fibroadenomas and 11 normal breast tissues. The prognostic significance of RASSF1A methylation was validated in 93 formalin fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues obtained from patients with operable breast cancer. RESULTS: Methylation of RASSF1A promoter was observed in 1/31 (3.2%) non-cancerous breast tissues and 53/93 (57.0%) early stage breast tumors. The only positive sample in the non-cancerous breast tissues group was found in a histological normal tissue surrounding the tumor. During the follow-up period, 24/93 (25.8%) patients relapsed and 19/93 (20.4%) died. Disease-Free-Interval (DFI) was significantly associated with RASSF1A methylation (p=0.028). CONCLUSIONS: RASSF1A promoter methylation provides important prognostic information in early stage breast cancer patients.

BACKGROUND: We evaluated the prognostic significance of KLK10 exon 3 methylation in patients with early-stage breast cancer since it has been shown to have a significant impact on biological characteristics of breast tumors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using methylation-specific PCR, we evaluated the specificity of KLK10 methylation in 10 breast tumors and matching normal tissues, 10 breast fibroadenomas, 11 normal breast tissues and in a testing group of 35 patients. The prognostic significance of KLK10 methylation was validated in an independent cohort of 93 patients. RESULTS: KLK10 was not methylated in normal breast tissues and fibroadenomas while it was in 5 of 10 breast tumors and in 1 of 10 matching normal tissues. In the testing group of 35 patients, KLK10 methylation was detected in 70.0% of patients who relapsed (P = 0.001) and in 77.8% of patients who died (P = 0.025). In the independent cohort, 53 of 93 (57.0%) patients were found positive for KLK10 methylation. During the follow-up period, 24 of 93 (25.8%) patients relapsed and 19 of 93 (20.4%) died. Disease-free interval (DFI) and overall survival (OS) were significantly associated with KLK10 methylation (P = 0.0025 and P = 0.003). Multivariate analysis revealed that KLK10 methylation was an independent prognostic factor for DFI and OS. CONCLUSION: KLK10 exon 3 methylation provides important prognostic information in early breast cancer patients.. BACKGROUND: We evaluated the prognostic significance of KLK10 exon 3 methylation in patients with early-stage breast cancer since it has been shown to have a significant impact on biological characteristics of breast tumors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using methylation-specific PCR, we evaluated the specificity of KLK10 methylation in 10 breast tumors and matching normal tissues, 10 breast fibroadenomas, 11 normal breast tissues and in a testing group of 35 patients. The prognostic significance of KLK10 methylation was validated in an independent cohort of 93 patients. RESULTS: KLK10 was not methylated in normal breast tissues and fibroadenomas while it was in 5 of 10 breast tumors and in 1 of 10 matching normal tissues. In the testing group of 35 patients, KLK10 methylation was detected in 70.0% of patients who relapsed (P = 0.001) and in 77.8% of patients who died (P = 0.025). In the independent cohort, 53 of 93 (57.0%) patients were found positive for KLK10 methylation. During the follow-up period, 24 of 93 (25.8%) patients relapsed and 19 of 93 (20.4%) died. Disease-free interval (DFI) and overall survival (OS) were significantly associated with KLK10 methylation (P = 0.0025 and P = 0.003). Multivariate analysis revealed that KLK10 methylation was an independent prognostic factor for DFI and OS. CONCLUSION: KLK10 exon 3 methylation provides important prognostic information in early breast cancer patients.

The role of ESR1 methylation in breast cancer and its influence on disease progression is not yet fully understood. Healthy breast tissue usually does not show ESR1 promoter methylation, whereas the frequency of ESR1 methylation appears to increase in primary breast cancer and in metastatic disease. Although women with ER positive breast cancer have a good prognosis, some will relapse. We aimed to evaluate the methylation status of ESR1 in primary breast cancer and its corresponding metastases by a methylation-specific real-time PCR and to correlate the methylation status with clinical outcome. Women who were treated for primary and metastatic breast cancer were included in the study. Tumor DNA was isolated from paraffin embedded tissue sections. After bisulfite treatment ESR1 promoter methylation was analyzed by real time-MSP of each tissue sample. Kaplan-Meier-Curves were drawn for survival. In the group of patients with positive ESR1 promoter methylation in the primary breast carcinoma survival was lower compared to the group of patients without methylation (38.1 months vs. 54.3 months, n.s.). Seven out of 19 (37%) of those patients with positive ESR1 promoter methylation developed loss of ER expression in metastatic disease. None of the patients who had primary tumours that were ESR1 methylation negative developed ER expression negative metastatic disease. The results underline the importance of the ESR1 promoter methylation and its potential application as a predictive marker. To improve the clinical outcome of patients with metastatic disease, those with initially positive ESR1 methylation status should undergo a tissue biopsy already at the beginning of metastatic disease to identify those with loss of ER expression and thus resitance to anti-endocrine therapy.. The role of ESR1 methylation in breast cancer and its influence on disease progression is not yet fully understood. Healthy breast tissue usually does not show ESR1 promoter methylation, whereas the frequency of ESR1 methylation appears to increase in primary breast cancer and in metastatic disease. Although women with ER positive breast cancer have a good prognosis, some will relapse. We aimed to evaluate the methylation status of ESR1 in primary breast cancer and its corresponding metastases by a methylation-specific real-time PCR and to correlate the methylation status with clinical outcome. Women who were treated for primary and metastatic breast cancer were included in the study. Tumor DNA was isolated from paraffin embedded tissue sections. After bisulfite treatment ESR1 promoter methylation was analyzed by real time-MSP of each tissue sample. Kaplan-Meier-Curves were drawn for survival. In the group of patients with positive ESR1 promoter methylation in the primary breast carcinoma survival was lower compared to the group of patients without methylation (38.1 months vs. 54.3 months, n.s.). Seven out of 19 (37%) of those patients with positive ESR1 promoter methylation developed loss of ER expression in metastatic disease. None of the patients who had primary tumours that were ESR1 methylation negative developed ER expression negative metastatic disease. The results underline the importance of the ESR1 promoter methylation and its potential application as a predictive marker. To improve the clinical outcome of patients with metastatic disease, those with initially positive ESR1 methylation status should undergo a tissue biopsy already at the beginning of metastatic disease to identify those with loss of ER expression and thus resitance to anti-endocrine therapy.

PURPOSE: To explore alterations in gene promoter methylation as a potential cause of acquired drug resistance to doxorubicin or combined treatment with 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C in human breast cancers. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Paired tumor samples from locally advanced breast cancer patients treated with doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil-mitomycin C were used in the genome-wide DNA methylation analysis as discovery cohort. An enlarged cohort from the same two prospective studies as those in the discovery cohort was used as a validation set in pyrosequencing analysis. RESULTS: A total of 469 genes were differentially methylated after treatment with doxorubicin and revealed a significant association with canonical pathways enriched for immune cell response and cell-cycle regulating genes including CDKN2A, CCND2, CCNA1, which were also associated to treatment response. Treatment with FUMI resulted in 343 differentially methylated genes representing canonical pathways such as retinoate biosynthesis, galphai signaling, and LXR/RXR activation. Despite the clearly different genes and pathways involved in the metabolism and therapeutic effect of both drugs, 46 genes were differentially methylated before and after treatment with both doxorubicin and FUMI. DNA methylation profiles in genes such as BRCA1, FOXC1, and IGFBP3, and most notably repetitive elements like ALU and LINE1, were associated with TP53 mutations status. CONCLUSION: We identified and validated key cell-cycle regulators differentially methylated before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy such as CDKN2A and CCNA1 and reported that methylation patterns of these genes may be potential predictive markers to anthracycline/mitomycine sensitivity.. PURPOSE: To explore alterations in gene promoter methylation as a potential cause of acquired drug resistance to doxorubicin or combined treatment with 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C in human breast cancers. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Paired tumor samples from locally advanced breast cancer patients treated with doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil-mitomycin C were used in the genome-wide DNA methylation analysis as discovery cohort. An enlarged cohort from the same two prospective studies as those in the discovery cohort was used as a validation set in pyrosequencing analysis. RESULTS: A total of 469 genes were differentially methylated after treatment with doxorubicin and revealed a significant association with canonical pathways enriched for immune cell response and cell-cycle regulating genes including CDKN2A, CCND2, CCNA1, which were also associated to treatment response. Treatment with FUMI resulted in 343 differentially methylated genes representing canonical pathways such as retinoate biosynthesis, galphai signaling, and LXR/RXR activation. Despite the clearly different genes and pathways involved in the metabolism and therapeutic effect of both drugs, 46 genes were differentially methylated before and after treatment with both doxorubicin and FUMI. DNA methylation profiles in genes such as BRCA1, FOXC1, and IGFBP3, and most notably repetitive elements like ALU and LINE1, were associated with TP53 mutations status. CONCLUSION: We identified and validated key cell-cycle regulators differentially methylated before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy such as CDKN2A and CCNA1 and reported that methylation patterns of these genes may be potential predictive markers to anthracycline/mitomycine sensitivity.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation of regulatory genes has frequently been found in human breast cancers and correlated to clinical outcome. In the present study we investigate stage specific changes in the DNA methylation patterns in order to identify valuable markers to understand how these changes affect breast cancer progression. METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analyses of 12 candidate genes ABCB1, BRCCA1, CDKN2A, ESR1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN, RASSF1A and FOXC1 was performed by pyrosequencing a series of 238 breast cancer tissue samples from DCIS to invasive tumors stage I to IV. RESULTS: Significant differences in methylation levels between the DCIS and invasive stage II tumors were observed for six genes RASSF1A, CDKN2A, MGMT, ABCB1, GSTP1 and FOXC1. RASSF1A, ABCB1 and GSTP1 showed significantly higher methylation levels in late stage compared to the early stage breast carcinoma. Z-score analysis revealed significantly lower methylation levels in DCIS and stage I tumors compared with stage II, III and IV tumors. Methylation levels of PTEN, PPP2R2B, FOXC1, ABCB1 and BRCA1 were lower in tumors harboring TP53 mutations then in tumors with wild type TP53. Z-score analysis showed that TP53 mutated tumors had significantly lower overall methylation levels compared to tumors with wild type TP53. Methylation levels of RASSF1A, PPP2R2B, GSTP1 and FOXC1 were higher in ER positive vs. ER negative tumors and methylation levels of PTEN and CDKN2A were higher in HER2 positive vs. HER2 negative tumors. Z-score analysis also showed that HER2 positive tumors had significantly higher z-scores of methylation compared to the HER2 negative tumors. Univariate survival analysis identifies methylation status of PPP2R2B as significant predictor of overall survival and breast cancer specific survival. CONCLUSIONS: In the present study we report that the level of aberrant DNA methylation is higher in late stage compared with early stage of invasive breast cancers and DCIS for genes mentioned above.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation of regulatory genes has frequently been found in human breast cancers and correlated to clinical outcome. In the present study we investigate stage specific changes in the DNA methylation patterns in order to identify valuable markers to understand how these changes affect breast cancer progression. METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analyses of 12 candidate genes ABCB1, BRCCA1, CDKN2A, ESR1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN, RASSF1A and FOXC1 was performed by pyrosequencing a series of 238 breast cancer tissue samples from DCIS to invasive tumors stage I to IV. RESULTS: Significant differences in methylation levels between the DCIS and invasive stage II tumors were observed for six genes RASSF1A, CDKN2A, MGMT, ABCB1, GSTP1 and FOXC1. RASSF1A, ABCB1 and GSTP1 showed significantly higher methylation levels in late stage compared to the early stage breast carcinoma. Z-score analysis revealed significantly lower methylation levels in DCIS and stage I tumors compared with stage II, III and IV tumors. Methylation levels of PTEN, PPP2R2B, FOXC1, ABCB1 and BRCA1 were lower in tumors harboring TP53 mutations then in tumors with wild type TP53. Z-score analysis showed that TP53 mutated tumors had significantly lower overall methylation levels compared to tumors with wild type TP53. Methylation levels of RASSF1A, PPP2R2B, GSTP1 and FOXC1 were higher in ER positive vs. ER negative tumors and methylation levels of PTEN and CDKN2A were higher in HER2 positive vs. HER2 negative tumors. Z-score analysis also showed that HER2 positive tumors had significantly higher z-scores of methylation compared to the HER2 negative tumors. Univariate survival analysis identifies methylation status of PPP2R2B as significant predictor of overall survival and breast cancer specific survival. CONCLUSIONS: In the present study we report that the level of aberrant DNA methylation is higher in late stage compared with early stage of invasive breast cancers and DCIS for genes mentioned above.

During the process of tumorigenesis, inactivation of tumor suppressors is a critical step. EZH2, a histone methyltransferase, promotes cell growth and migration through catalyzing trimethylation of histone H3 at Lys 27 (H3K27me3) and plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Its expression can be controlled by phosphorylation. However, the regulation of EZH2 activity by tumor suppressor kinase is not well understood. In this study, we show that glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3beta) negatively regulates H3K27 trimethylation. We also validate that GSKbeta physically interacts with EZH2, and their interaction occurs in the cytosol. GSK3beta phosphorylates EZH2 at Ser363 and Thr367 in vitro, and activating GSK3beta upregulates Thr367 phosphorylationin vivo. Cells expressing GSK3beta-non-phosphorylatable mutant EZH2 have higher H3K27 trimethylation and enhanced ability of cell migration and anchorage-independent growth. Inactivation of GSK3beta as measured by its phosphorylation at Ser9 is positively correlated with higher level of H3K27 trimethylation in tumor tissues from breast cancer patients. Our study indicated that GSK3beta phosphorylates EZH2 at Ser363 and Thr367, resulting in reduced H3K27 trimethylation and biological activity of EZH2 in breast cancer.. During the process of tumorigenesis, inactivation of tumor suppressors is a critical step. EZH2, a histone methyltransferase, promotes cell growth and migration through catalyzing trimethylation of histone H3 at Lys 27 (H3K27me3) and plays an important role in tumorigenesis. Its expression can be controlled by phosphorylation. However, the regulation of EZH2 activity by tumor suppressor kinase is not well understood. In this study, we show that glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3beta) negatively regulates H3K27 trimethylation. We also validate that GSKbeta physically interacts with EZH2, and their interaction occurs in the cytosol. GSK3beta phosphorylates EZH2 at Ser363 and Thr367 in vitro, and activating GSK3beta upregulates Thr367 phosphorylationin vivo. Cells expressing GSK3beta-non-phosphorylatable mutant EZH2 have higher H3K27 trimethylation and enhanced ability of cell migration and anchorage-independent growth. Inactivation of GSK3beta as measured by its phosphorylation at Ser9 is positively correlated with higher level of H3K27 trimethylation in tumor tissues from breast cancer patients. Our study indicated that GSK3beta phosphorylates EZH2 at Ser363 and Thr367, resulting in reduced H3K27 trimethylation and biological activity of EZH2 in breast cancer.

The p57KIP2 gene belongs to the Cip/Kip family of CDK inhibitors and has been demonstrated to be a tumor suppressor gene, being inactivated in various types of human cancers. We analyzed the methylation and expression status of p57KIP2 in lung and breast cancers, and in malignant mesotheliomas (MMs). The promoter region of p57KIP2 was determined by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in samples of lung and breast cancer, and of MM. The expression of the gene in the cell lines was determined by RT-PCR and correlated with the methylation status. Aberrant methylation was detected by MSP in 9 of 27 (33%) and 25 of 78 (32%) lung cancer cell lines and tumors, respectively, 11 of 18 (61%) and 17 of 38 (45%) breast cancer cell lines and tumors, respectively, and 1 of 25 (4%) MM tumors. DNA methylation was detected but rarely in the corresponding non-malignant tissues. In addition, the gene expression was restored in the methylated cell lines following 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, confirming that the methylation was indeed responsible for the gene down-regulation. We also examined the relationship between the p57KIP2 methylation status and the clinicopathological features of the primary tumors, and found that there was no relationship between the p57KIP2 methylation status and any of the examined clinicopathological features. In summary, our results demonstrate that p57KIP2 methylation associated with the gene down-regulation is frequently present in lung and breast cancers and plays an important role at the molecular level in the pathogenesis of these cancers.. The p57KIP2 gene belongs to the Cip/Kip family of CDK inhibitors and has been demonstrated to be a tumor suppressor gene, being inactivated in various types of human cancers. We analyzed the methylation and expression status of p57KIP2 in lung and breast cancers, and in malignant mesotheliomas (MMs). The promoter region of p57KIP2 was determined by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in samples of lung and breast cancer, and of MM. The expression of the gene in the cell lines was determined by RT-PCR and correlated with the methylation status. Aberrant methylation was detected by MSP in 9 of 27 (33%) and 25 of 78 (32%) lung cancer cell lines and tumors, respectively, 11 of 18 (61%) and 17 of 38 (45%) breast cancer cell lines and tumors, respectively, and 1 of 25 (4%) MM tumors. DNA methylation was detected but rarely in the corresponding non-malignant tissues. In addition, the gene expression was restored in the methylated cell lines following 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, confirming that the methylation was indeed responsible for the gene down-regulation. We also examined the relationship between the p57KIP2 methylation status and the clinicopathological features of the primary tumors, and found that there was no relationship between the p57KIP2 methylation status and any of the examined clinicopathological features. In summary, our results demonstrate that p57KIP2 methylation associated with the gene down-regulation is frequently present in lung and breast cancers and plays an important role at the molecular level in the pathogenesis of these cancers.

Cytosine-methylation changes are stable and thought to be among the earliest events in tumorigenesis. Theoretically, DNA carrying tumor-specifying methylation patterns escape the tumors and may be found circulating in the sera from cancer patients, thus providing the basis for development of noninvasive clinical tests for early cancer detection. Indeed, using methylation-specific PCR-based techniques, several groups reported the detection of tumor-associated methylated DNA in the sera from cancer patients with varying clinical success. However, by design, such analytical approaches allow assessment of the presence of molecules with only one methylation pattern, leaving the bigger picture unexplored. The limited knowledge about circulating DNA methylation patterns hinders the efficient development of clinical methylation tests and testing platforms. Here, we report the results of a comprehensive methylation pattern analysis from breast cancer clinical tissues and sera obtained using massively parallel bisulphite pyrosequencing. The four loci studied were recently discovered by our group, and demonstrated to be powerful epigenetic biomarkers of breast cancer. The detailed analysis of more than 700,000 DNA fragments derived from more than 50 individuals (cancer and cancer-free) revealed an unappreciated complexity of genomic cytosine-methylation patterns in both tissue derived and circulating DNAs. Both tumor and cancer-free tissues (as well as sera) contained molecules with nearly every conceivable cytosine-methylation pattern at each locus. Tumor samples displayed more variation in methylation level than normal samples. Importantly, by establishing the methylation landscape within circulating DNA, this study has better defined the development challenges facing DNA methylation-based cancer-detection tests.. Cytosine-methylation changes are stable and thought to be among the earliest events in tumorigenesis. Theoretically, DNA carrying tumor-specifying methylation patterns escape the tumors and may be found circulating in the sera from cancer patients, thus providing the basis for development of noninvasive clinical tests for early cancer detection. Indeed, using methylation-specific PCR-based techniques, several groups reported the detection of tumor-associated methylated DNA in the sera from cancer patients with varying clinical success. However, by design, such analytical approaches allow assessment of the presence of molecules with only one methylation pattern, leaving the bigger picture unexplored. The limited knowledge about circulating DNA methylation patterns hinders the efficient development of clinical methylation tests and testing platforms. Here, we report the results of a comprehensive methylation pattern analysis from breast cancer clinical tissues and sera obtained using massively parallel bisulphite pyrosequencing. The four loci studied were recently discovered by our group, and demonstrated to be powerful epigenetic biomarkers of breast cancer. The detailed analysis of more than 700,000 DNA fragments derived from more than 50 individuals (cancer and cancer-free) revealed an unappreciated complexity of genomic cytosine-methylation patterns in both tissue derived and circulating DNAs. Both tumor and cancer-free tissues (as well as sera) contained molecules with nearly every conceivable cytosine-methylation pattern at each locus. Tumor samples displayed more variation in methylation level than normal samples. Importantly, by establishing the methylation landscape within circulating DNA, this study has better defined the development challenges facing DNA methylation-based cancer-detection tests.

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women continuing to rise worldwide. Breast cancer emerges through a multi-step process, encompassing progressive changes from a normal cell to hyperplasia (with and without atypia), carcinoma in situ, invasive carcinoma, and metastasis. In the current study, we analyzed the morphological changes and alterations of DNA methylation, histone methylation and microRNA expression during estradiol-17beta (E(2))-induced mammary carcinogenesis in female August Copenhagen Irish (ACI) rats. E(2)-induced breast carcinogenesis in ACI rats provides a physiologically relevant and genetically defined animal model for studying human sporadic breast cancer. The pattern of morphological changes in mammary glands during E(2)-induced carcinogenesis was characterized by transition from normal appearing alveolar and ductular hyperplasia to focal hyperplastic areas of atypical glands and ducts accompanied by a rapid and sustained loss of global DNA methylation, LINE-1 hypomethylation, loss of histone H3 lysine 9 and histone H4 lysine 20 trimethylation, and altered microRNAs expression. More importantly, these alterations in the mammary tissue occurred after six weeks of E(2)-treatment, whereas the atypical hyperplasia, which represents a putative precursor lesion to mammary carcinoma in this model, was detected only after twelve weeks of exposure, demonstrating clearly that these events are directly associated with the effects of E(2) and are not a consequence of the preexisting preneoplastic lesions. The results of this study show that deregulation of cellular epigenetic processes plays a crucial role in the mechanism of E(2)-induced mammary carcinogenesis in ACI rats, especially in the tumor initiation process.. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women continuing to rise worldwide. Breast cancer emerges through a multi-step process, encompassing progressive changes from a normal cell to hyperplasia (with and without atypia), carcinoma in situ, invasive carcinoma, and metastasis. In the current study, we analyzed the morphological changes and alterations of DNA methylation, histone methylation and microRNA expression during estradiol-17beta (E(2))-induced mammary carcinogenesis in female August Copenhagen Irish (ACI) rats. E(2)-induced breast carcinogenesis in ACI rats provides a physiologically relevant and genetically defined animal model for studying human sporadic breast cancer. The pattern of morphological changes in mammary glands during E(2)-induced carcinogenesis was characterized by transition from normal appearing alveolar and ductular hyperplasia to focal hyperplastic areas of atypical glands and ducts accompanied by a rapid and sustained loss of global DNA methylation, LINE-1 hypomethylation, loss of histone H3 lysine 9 and histone H4 lysine 20 trimethylation, and altered microRNAs expression. More importantly, these alterations in the mammary tissue occurred after six weeks of E(2)-treatment, whereas the atypical hyperplasia, which represents a putative precursor lesion to mammary carcinoma in this model, was detected only after twelve weeks of exposure, demonstrating clearly that these events are directly associated with the effects of E(2) and are not a consequence of the preexisting preneoplastic lesions. The results of this study show that deregulation of cellular epigenetic processes plays a crucial role in the mechanism of E(2)-induced mammary carcinogenesis in ACI rats, especially in the tumor initiation process.

The effects of 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine, 9-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine, and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on promoter methylation of the selected tumor suppressor genes (i.e., ERalpha, BRCA1, RARbeta2, E-cadherin, PTEN, and APC) were estimated using methylation-sensitive restriction analysis. The studies were carried out in hormone-responsive, low-invasive cell line MCF-7 and hormone-insensitive, highly invasive cell line MDA-MB-231. The results demonstrate an implication of the tested adenosine analogues and 5-aza-dCyd in regulation of DNA methylation process. Moreover, the effects of nucleoside analogues on PTEN promoter methylation suggest distinct mechanism of regulation of the epigenetic DNA modification in low-invasive compared to highly invasive breast cancer cells.. The effects of 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine, 9-beta-D-arabinofuranosyl-2-fluoroadenine, and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on promoter methylation of the selected tumor suppressor genes (i.e., ERalpha, BRCA1, RARbeta2, E-cadherin, PTEN, and APC) were estimated using methylation-sensitive restriction analysis. The studies were carried out in hormone-responsive, low-invasive cell line MCF-7 and hormone-insensitive, highly invasive cell line MDA-MB-231. The results demonstrate an implication of the tested adenosine analogues and 5-aza-dCyd in regulation of DNA methylation process. Moreover, the effects of nucleoside analogues on PTEN promoter methylation suggest distinct mechanism of regulation of the epigenetic DNA modification in low-invasive compared to highly invasive breast cancer cells.

AIM: We examined methylation patterns with aggressive tumor phenotypes and investigated demographic, socioeconomic and reproductive predictors of gene methylation. MATERIALS & METHODS: Pyrosequencing quantified methylation of BRCA1, EGFR, GSTM2, RASSF1, TFF1 and Sat 2. We used quantile regression models to calculate adjusted median methylation values by estrogen and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status. Bivariate associations between participant characteristics and methylation were examined. RESULTS: Higher percent methylation of GSTM2 was observed in ER/PR-negative compared with ER/PR-positive tumors in ductal carcinoma in situ (14 vs 2%) and invasive (35 vs 3%) tissue components. Trends in aberrant GSTM2 methylation across tissue components were stronger among ER/PR-negative tumors (p-interaction <0.001). Black women were more likely to have ER/PR-negative tumors (p = 0.01) and show hypermethylation of GSTM2 compared with other women (p = 0.05). CONCLUSION: GSTM2 promoter hypermethylation may serve as a potential biomarker of aggressive tumor development and a mechanism for ER/PR-negative tumor progression.. AIM: We examined methylation patterns with aggressive tumor phenotypes and investigated demographic, socioeconomic and reproductive predictors of gene methylation. MATERIALS & METHODS: Pyrosequencing quantified methylation of BRCA1, EGFR, GSTM2, RASSF1, TFF1 and Sat 2. We used quantile regression models to calculate adjusted median methylation values by estrogen and progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status. Bivariate associations between participant characteristics and methylation were examined. RESULTS: Higher percent methylation of GSTM2 was observed in ER/PR-negative compared with ER/PR-positive tumors in ductal carcinoma in situ (14 vs 2%) and invasive (35 vs 3%) tissue components. Trends in aberrant GSTM2 methylation across tissue components were stronger among ER/PR-negative tumors (p-interaction <0.001). Black women were more likely to have ER/PR-negative tumors (p = 0.01) and show hypermethylation of GSTM2 compared with other women (p = 0.05). CONCLUSION: GSTM2 promoter hypermethylation may serve as a potential biomarker of aggressive tumor development and a mechanism for ER/PR-negative tumor progression.

BACKGROUND: Age is one of the strongest predictors of cancer, chronic disease and mortality, but biological responses to aging differ among people. Epigenetic DNA modifications have been used to estimate "biological age," which may be a useful predictor of disease risk. We test this hypothesis for breast cancer. METHODS: Using a case-cohort approach, we measured baseline blood DNA methylation of 2,764 women enrolled in the Sister Study, 1,566 of whom subsequently developed breast cancer after an average of six years. Using three previously established methylation-based "clocks" (Hannum, Horvath, and Levine) we defined biological age acceleration for each woman by comparing her estimated biological age with her chronological age. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for breast cancer risk were estimated using Cox regression models. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: Each of the three clocks showed that biological age acceleration was statistically significantly associated with increased risk of developing breast cancer (5 year age acceleration, Hannum's clock: HR = 1.10, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.21, P= 0.04; Horvath's clock: HR = 1.08, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.17, P= 0.04; Levine's clock: HR: 1.15, 95% CI: 1.07, 1.23, P < 0.001 ). For Levine's clock, each five-year acceleration in biological age corresponded with a 15% increase in breast cancer risk. Although biological age may accelerate with menopausal transition, age acceleration in premenopausal women independently predicted breast cancer. Case-only analysis suggested that, among women who develop breast cancer, increased age acceleration is associated with invasive cancer (OR for invasive=1.09, 95% CI: 0.98, 1.22, P = 0.10). CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation-based measures of biological age may be important predictors of breast cancer risk.. BACKGROUND: Age is one of the strongest predictors of cancer, chronic disease and mortality, but biological responses to aging differ among people. Epigenetic DNA modifications have been used to estimate "biological age," which may be a useful predictor of disease risk. We test this hypothesis for breast cancer. METHODS: Using a case-cohort approach, we measured baseline blood DNA methylation of 2,764 women enrolled in the Sister Study, 1,566 of whom subsequently developed breast cancer after an average of six years. Using three previously established methylation-based "clocks" (Hannum, Horvath, and Levine) we defined biological age acceleration for each woman by comparing her estimated biological age with her chronological age. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for breast cancer risk were estimated using Cox regression models. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: Each of the three clocks showed that biological age acceleration was statistically significantly associated with increased risk of developing breast cancer (5 year age acceleration, Hannum's clock: HR = 1.10, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.21, P= 0.04; Horvath's clock: HR = 1.08, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.17, P= 0.04; Levine's clock: HR: 1.15, 95% CI: 1.07, 1.23, P < 0.001 ). For Levine's clock, each five-year acceleration in biological age corresponded with a 15% increase in breast cancer risk. Although biological age may accelerate with menopausal transition, age acceleration in premenopausal women independently predicted breast cancer. Case-only analysis suggested that, among women who develop breast cancer, increased age acceleration is associated with invasive cancer (OR for invasive=1.09, 95% CI: 0.98, 1.22, P = 0.10). CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation-based measures of biological age may be important predictors of breast cancer risk.

We recently identified a candidate tumor suppressor gene, HIN-1, that is silenced due to methylation in the majority of sporadic breast carcinomas and is localized to 5q33-qter, an area frequently lost in BRCA1 tumors and thought to harbor a BRCA1 modifier gene. To establish whether germ-line mutations in HIN-1 may influence breast cancer risk, we sequenced the HIN-1 coding region in 10 familial breast cancer patients with positive logarithm of the odds scores of at least one of the markers flanking HIN-1. We also sequenced the HIN-1 coding region in 15 BRCA1 and 35 sporadic breast tumors to determine whether HIN-1 is the target of the frequent 5q loss in BRCA1 tumors. No sequence alterations were found in any of the cases analyzed. However, analysis of HIN-1 promoter methylation status revealed that in striking contrast to sporadic cases, there is a nearly complete lack of HIN-1 methylation in BRCA1 tumors (P < 0.0001). Sporadic breast tumors with a "BRCA1-like" histopathological phenotype also demonstrated significantly lower frequency of HIN-1 promoter methylation (P = 0.01) compared with other cancer types, and there was also a difference among tumors based on their estrogen receptor and HER2 status (P = 0.006), suggesting that HIN-1 methylation patterns are associated with specific breast cancer subtypes.. We recently identified a candidate tumor suppressor gene, HIN-1, that is silenced due to methylation in the majority of sporadic breast carcinomas and is localized to 5q33-qter, an area frequently lost in BRCA1 tumors and thought to harbor a BRCA1 modifier gene. To establish whether germ-line mutations in HIN-1 may influence breast cancer risk, we sequenced the HIN-1 coding region in 10 familial breast cancer patients with positive logarithm of the odds scores of at least one of the markers flanking HIN-1. We also sequenced the HIN-1 coding region in 15 BRCA1 and 35 sporadic breast tumors to determine whether HIN-1 is the target of the frequent 5q loss in BRCA1 tumors. No sequence alterations were found in any of the cases analyzed. However, analysis of HIN-1 promoter methylation status revealed that in striking contrast to sporadic cases, there is a nearly complete lack of HIN-1 methylation in BRCA1 tumors (P < 0.0001). Sporadic breast tumors with a "BRCA1-like" histopathological phenotype also demonstrated significantly lower frequency of HIN-1 promoter methylation (P = 0.01) compared with other cancer types, and there was also a difference among tumors based on their estrogen receptor and HER2 status (P = 0.006), suggesting that HIN-1 methylation patterns are associated with specific breast cancer subtypes.

BACKGROUND: Global hypomethylation has been suggested to cause genomic instability and lead to an increased risk of cancer. We examined the association between the global methylation level of peripheral blood leukocyte DNA and breast cancer among Japanese women. METHODS: We conducted a hospital-based case-control study of 384 patients aged 20-74 years with newly diagnosed, histologically confirmed invasive breast cancer, and 384 matched controls from medical checkup examinees in Nagano, Japan. Global methylation levels in leukocyte DNA were measured by LUminometric Methylation Assay. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations between global hypomethylation and breast cancer were estimated using a logistic regression model. RESULTS: Compared with women in the highest tertile of global methylation level, ORs for the second and lowest tertiles were 1.87 (95% CI=1.20-2.91) and 2.86 (95% CI=1.85-4.44), respectively. Global methylation levels were significantly lower in cases than controls, regardless of the hormone receptor status of the cancer (all P values for trend <0.05). INTERPRETATION: These findings suggest that the global methylation level of peripheral blood leukocyte DNA is low in patients with breast cancer and may be a potential biomarker for breast cancer risk.. BACKGROUND: Global hypomethylation has been suggested to cause genomic instability and lead to an increased risk of cancer. We examined the association between the global methylation level of peripheral blood leukocyte DNA and breast cancer among Japanese women. METHODS: We conducted a hospital-based case-control study of 384 patients aged 20-74 years with newly diagnosed, histologically confirmed invasive breast cancer, and 384 matched controls from medical checkup examinees in Nagano, Japan. Global methylation levels in leukocyte DNA were measured by LUminometric Methylation Assay. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the associations between global hypomethylation and breast cancer were estimated using a logistic regression model. RESULTS: Compared with women in the highest tertile of global methylation level, ORs for the second and lowest tertiles were 1.87 (95% CI=1.20-2.91) and 2.86 (95% CI=1.85-4.44), respectively. Global methylation levels were significantly lower in cases than controls, regardless of the hormone receptor status of the cancer (all P values for trend <0.05). INTERPRETATION: These findings suggest that the global methylation level of peripheral blood leukocyte DNA is low in patients with breast cancer and may be a potential biomarker for breast cancer risk.

The complexity of gene regulation has created obstacles to defining mechanisms that establish the patterns of gene expression characteristic of the different clinical phenotypes of breast cancer. TFAP2C is a transcription factor that has a critical role in the regulation of both estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and c-ErbB2/HER2 (Her2). Herein, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation and direct sequencing (ChIP-seq) for TFAP2C in four breast cancer cell lines. Comparing the genomic binding sites for TFAP2C, we identified that glutathione peroxidase (GPX1) is regulated by TFAP2C through an AP-2 regulatory region in the promoter of the GPX1 gene. Knockdown of TFAP2C, but not the related factor TFAP2A, resulted in an abrogation of GPX1 expression. Selenium-dependent GPX activity correlated with endogenous GPX1 expression and overexpression of exogenous GPX1 induced GPX activity and significantly increased resistance to tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Methylation of the CpG island encompassing the AP-2 regulatory region was identified in cell lines where TFAP2C failed to bind the GPX1 promoter and GPX1 expression was unresponsive to TFAP2C. Furthermore, in cell lines where GPX1 promoter methylation was associated with gene silencing, treatment with 5'-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5'-aza-dC) (an inhibitor of DNA methylation) allowed TFAP2C to bind to the GPX1 promoter resulting in the activation of GPX1 RNA and protein expression. Methylation of the GPX1 promoter was identified in approximately 20% of primary breast cancers and a highly significant correlation between the TFAP2C and GPX1 expression was confirmed when considering only those tumors with an unmethylated promoter, whereas the related factor, TFAP2A, failed to demonstrate a correlation. The results demonstrate that TFAP2C regulates the expression of GPX1, which influences the redox state and sensitivity to oxidative stress induced by peroxides. Given the established role of GPX1 in breast cancer, the results provide an important mechanism for TFAP2C to further influence oncogenesis and progression of breast carcinoma cells.. The complexity of gene regulation has created obstacles to defining mechanisms that establish the patterns of gene expression characteristic of the different clinical phenotypes of breast cancer. TFAP2C is a transcription factor that has a critical role in the regulation of both estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and c-ErbB2/HER2 (Her2). Herein, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation and direct sequencing (ChIP-seq) for TFAP2C in four breast cancer cell lines. Comparing the genomic binding sites for TFAP2C, we identified that glutathione peroxidase (GPX1) is regulated by TFAP2C through an AP-2 regulatory region in the promoter of the GPX1 gene. Knockdown of TFAP2C, but not the related factor TFAP2A, resulted in an abrogation of GPX1 expression. Selenium-dependent GPX activity correlated with endogenous GPX1 expression and overexpression of exogenous GPX1 induced GPX activity and significantly increased resistance to tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Methylation of the CpG island encompassing the AP-2 regulatory region was identified in cell lines where TFAP2C failed to bind the GPX1 promoter and GPX1 expression was unresponsive to TFAP2C. Furthermore, in cell lines where GPX1 promoter methylation was associated with gene silencing, treatment with 5'-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5'-aza-dC) (an inhibitor of DNA methylation) allowed TFAP2C to bind to the GPX1 promoter resulting in the activation of GPX1 RNA and protein expression. Methylation of the GPX1 promoter was identified in approximately 20% of primary breast cancers and a highly significant correlation between the TFAP2C and GPX1 expression was confirmed when considering only those tumors with an unmethylated promoter, whereas the related factor, TFAP2A, failed to demonstrate a correlation. The results demonstrate that TFAP2C regulates the expression of GPX1, which influences the redox state and sensitivity to oxidative stress induced by peroxides. Given the established role of GPX1 in breast cancer, the results provide an important mechanism for TFAP2C to further influence oncogenesis and progression of breast carcinoma cells.

Introduction: Considering the increasing trend in incidence rates, morbidity and mortality of breast cancer, there is an urgent need to identify and validate new biomarkers for early detection and better management. The purpose of the study was to investigate BRCA1 protein expression and promoter methylation of the BRCA1 gene and their association with molecular subtypes based on estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positivity. Materials and Methods: A total of 114 breast cancer tissue biopsies were collected for methylation specific PCR (MSP) and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis. Results: Seven tissue microarrays were constructed. BRCA1 protein expression was reduced in 55/114 (48.2%) and in the majority of ER-negative tumors (73.3%) (p<0.001). Similarly BRCA1 expression was reduced in the majority of PR-negative tumors (69.2%) but without statistical significance (p value=0.083). BRCA1 methylation was positive in 59.6% cases. A subset regarding ER+, PR+ and HER2+ was identified which consisted of 31.6% in which an inverse relationship between BRCA1 methylation and protein expression was noted. Conclusion: Reduced expression was associated with ER and PR negative status which is linked with a poor prognosis. BRCA1 protein expression might thus be used as a prognostic indicator to predict treatment response to hormone therapy.. Introduction: Considering the increasing trend in incidence rates, morbidity and mortality of breast cancer, there is an urgent need to identify and validate new biomarkers for early detection and better management. The purpose of the study was to investigate BRCA1 protein expression and promoter methylation of the BRCA1 gene and their association with molecular subtypes based on estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positivity. Materials and Methods: A total of 114 breast cancer tissue biopsies were collected for methylation specific PCR (MSP) and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis. Results: Seven tissue microarrays were constructed. BRCA1 protein expression was reduced in 55/114 (48.2%) and in the majority of ER-negative tumors (73.3%) (p<0.001). Similarly BRCA1 expression was reduced in the majority of PR-negative tumors (69.2%) but without statistical significance (p value=0.083). BRCA1 methylation was positive in 59.6% cases. A subset regarding ER+, PR+ and HER2+ was identified which consisted of 31.6% in which an inverse relationship between BRCA1 methylation and protein expression was noted. Conclusion: Reduced expression was associated with ER and PR negative status which is linked with a poor prognosis. BRCA1 protein expression might thus be used as a prognostic indicator to predict treatment response to hormone therapy.

We have developed a modification of methylation sensitive arbitrarily primed PCR, one of the methods of differentially methylated CpG islands in cancer cells genomes screening. Seven genes undergoing abnormal epigenetic regulation in breast cancer, SEMA6B, BIN1, VCPIP1, LAMC3, KCNH2, CACNG4 and PSMF1, have been identified by this method. Methylation and loss of expression frequencies were evaluated for each of the identified genes on 100 paired (cancer/morphologically intact control) breast tissue samples. Significant frequencies of abnormal methylation were detected for SEMA6B, BIN1, and LAMC3 (38%, 18%, and 8% correspondingly). Methylation of the above genes was not characteristic for morphologically intact breast tissues. Downregulation of SEMA6B, BIN1, VCPIP1, LAMC3, KCNH2, CACNG4 and PSMF1 in breast cancer was as frequent as 44-94% by real-time PCR expression assay. The most pronounced functional alterations were demonstrated for SEMA6B and LAMC3 genes, which allows recommending their inclusion into the panels of carcinogenesis diagnostic panels. Fine methylation mapping was performed for the genes most frequently methylated in breast cancer (SEMA6B, BIN1, LAMC3), providing a fundamental basis for the development of effective methylation tests for these genes.. We have developed a modification of methylation sensitive arbitrarily primed PCR, one of the methods of differentially methylated CpG islands in cancer cells genomes screening. Seven genes undergoing abnormal epigenetic regulation in breast cancer, SEMA6B, BIN1, VCPIP1, LAMC3, KCNH2, CACNG4 and PSMF1, have been identified by this method. Methylation and loss of expression frequencies were evaluated for each of the identified genes on 100 paired (cancer/morphologically intact control) breast tissue samples. Significant frequencies of abnormal methylation were detected for SEMA6B, BIN1, and LAMC3 (38%, 18%, and 8% correspondingly). Methylation of the above genes was not characteristic for morphologically intact breast tissues. Downregulation of SEMA6B, BIN1, VCPIP1, LAMC3, KCNH2, CACNG4 and PSMF1 in breast cancer was as frequent as 44-94% by real-time PCR expression assay. The most pronounced functional alterations were demonstrated for SEMA6B and LAMC3 genes, which allows recommending their inclusion into the panels of carcinogenesis diagnostic panels. Fine methylation mapping was performed for the genes most frequently methylated in breast cancer (SEMA6B, BIN1, LAMC3), providing a fundamental basis for the development of effective methylation tests for these genes.

BACKGROUND: Loss of BIN1 tumor suppressor expression is abundant in human cancer and its frequency exceeds that of genetic alterations, suggesting the role of epigenetic regulators (DNA methylation). BIN1 re-expression in the DU145 prostate cancer cell line after 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment was recently reported but no methylation of the BIN1 promoter CpG island was found in DU145. METHODS: Methylation-sensitive arbitrarily-primed PCR was used to detect genomic loci abnormally methylated in breast cancer. BIN1 CpG island fragment was identified among the differentially methylated loci as a result of direct sequencing of the methylation-sensitive arbitrarily-primed PCR product and subsequent BLAST alliance. BIN1 CpG island cancer related methylation in breast and prostate cancers was confirmed by bisulphite sequencing and its methylation frequency was evaluated by methylation sensitive PCR. Loss of heterozygosity analysis of the BIN1 region was performed with two introgenic and one closely adjacent extragenic microsatellite markers.BIN1 expression was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR. RESULTS: We have identified a 3'-part of BIN1 promoter CpG island among the genomic loci abnormally methylated in breast cancer. The fragment proved to be methylated in 18/99 (18%) and 4/46 (9%) breast and prostate tumors, correspondingly, as well as in MCF7 and T47D breast cancer cell lines, but was never methylated in normal tissues and lymphocytes as well as in DU145 and LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines. The 5'-part of the CpG island revealed no methylation in all samples tested. BIN1 expression losses were detected in MCF7 and T47D cells and were characteristic of primary breast tumors (10/13; 77%), while loss of heterozygosity was a rare event in tissue samples (2/22 informative cases; 9%) and was ruled out for MCF7. CONCLUSION: BIN1 promoter CpG island is composed of two parts differing drastically in the methylation patterns in cancer. This appears to be a common feature of cancer related genes and demands further functional significance exploration. Although we have found no evidence of the functional role of such a non-core methylation in BIN1 expression regulation, our data do not altogether rule this possibility out.. BACKGROUND: Loss of BIN1 tumor suppressor expression is abundant in human cancer and its frequency exceeds that of genetic alterations, suggesting the role of epigenetic regulators (DNA methylation). BIN1 re-expression in the DU145 prostate cancer cell line after 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment was recently reported but no methylation of the BIN1 promoter CpG island was found in DU145. METHODS: Methylation-sensitive arbitrarily-primed PCR was used to detect genomic loci abnormally methylated in breast cancer. BIN1 CpG island fragment was identified among the differentially methylated loci as a result of direct sequencing of the methylation-sensitive arbitrarily-primed PCR product and subsequent BLAST alliance. BIN1 CpG island cancer related methylation in breast and prostate cancers was confirmed by bisulphite sequencing and its methylation frequency was evaluated by methylation sensitive PCR. Loss of heterozygosity analysis of the BIN1 region was performed with two introgenic and one closely adjacent extragenic microsatellite markers.BIN1 expression was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR. RESULTS: We have identified a 3'-part of BIN1 promoter CpG island among the genomic loci abnormally methylated in breast cancer. The fragment proved to be methylated in 18/99 (18%) and 4/46 (9%) breast and prostate tumors, correspondingly, as well as in MCF7 and T47D breast cancer cell lines, but was never methylated in normal tissues and lymphocytes as well as in DU145 and LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines. The 5'-part of the CpG island revealed no methylation in all samples tested. BIN1 expression losses were detected in MCF7 and T47D cells and were characteristic of primary breast tumors (10/13; 77%), while loss of heterozygosity was a rare event in tissue samples (2/22 informative cases; 9%) and was ruled out for MCF7. CONCLUSION: BIN1 promoter CpG island is composed of two parts differing drastically in the methylation patterns in cancer. This appears to be a common feature of cancer related genes and demands further functional significance exploration. Although we have found no evidence of the functional role of such a non-core methylation in BIN1 expression regulation, our data do not altogether rule this possibility out.

Identifying key mediators of cancer cell invasion and metastasis is critical to the development of more effective cancer therapies. We previously identified Filamin A interacting protein 1-like (FILIP1L) as an important inhibitor of cell migration and invasion in ovarian cancer. FILIP1L expression was inversely correlated with the invasive potential of ovarian cancer cell lines and ovarian cancer specimens. We also demonstrated that DNA methylation in the FILIP1L promoter was a mechanism by which FILIP1L was down-regulated in ovarian cancer. In our present study, we tested this observation in other cancer histologies: breast, colon, lung and pancreatic cancers. Both mRNA and protein expression of FILIP1L were down-regulated in these cancer cells compared with their normal epithelial cells. As in ovarian cancer, DNA methylation is a mechanism by which FILIP1L is down-regulated in these cancer histologies. Methylation status of the FILIP1L promoter was inversely correlated with FILIP1L expression. Reduced methylation in the FILIP1L promoter following treatment with a DNA demethylating agent was associated with restoration of FILIP1L expression in these cancer cells. Further, FILIP1L expression was inversely correlated with the invasive potential of these cancer cells. Re-expression of FILIP1L in FILIP1L-low expressing, highly-invasive cancer cell lines resulted in inhibition of cell invasion. Correspondingly, knockdown of FILIP1L in FILIP1L-high expressing, low-invasive cancer cell lines resulted in increase of cell invasion. Overall, these findings suggest that down-regulation of FILIP1L associated with DNA methylation is related with the invasive phenotype in various cancers. Thus, modulation of FILIP1L expression has the potential to be a target for cancer therapy.. Identifying key mediators of cancer cell invasion and metastasis is critical to the development of more effective cancer therapies. We previously identified Filamin A interacting protein 1-like (FILIP1L) as an important inhibitor of cell migration and invasion in ovarian cancer. FILIP1L expression was inversely correlated with the invasive potential of ovarian cancer cell lines and ovarian cancer specimens. We also demonstrated that DNA methylation in the FILIP1L promoter was a mechanism by which FILIP1L was down-regulated in ovarian cancer. In our present study, we tested this observation in other cancer histologies: breast, colon, lung and pancreatic cancers. Both mRNA and protein expression of FILIP1L were down-regulated in these cancer cells compared with their normal epithelial cells. As in ovarian cancer, DNA methylation is a mechanism by which FILIP1L is down-regulated in these cancer histologies. Methylation status of the FILIP1L promoter was inversely correlated with FILIP1L expression. Reduced methylation in the FILIP1L promoter following treatment with a DNA demethylating agent was associated with restoration of FILIP1L expression in these cancer cells. Further, FILIP1L expression was inversely correlated with the invasive potential of these cancer cells. Re-expression of FILIP1L in FILIP1L-low expressing, highly-invasive cancer cell lines resulted in inhibition of cell invasion. Correspondingly, knockdown of FILIP1L in FILIP1L-high expressing, low-invasive cancer cell lines resulted in increase of cell invasion. Overall, these findings suggest that down-regulation of FILIP1L associated with DNA methylation is related with the invasive phenotype in various cancers. Thus, modulation of FILIP1L expression has the potential to be a target for cancer therapy.

To understand the transcriptional regulation of p73 by promoter methylation and Nrf-2 in breast carcinogenesis, ChIP assay indicated that Nrf-2 can bind to both promoters and can activate the transcription of TAp73 and DeltaNp73 in MCF-7 cell line, knockdown of Nrf-2 gene resulted in an abrogation of TAp73 and DeltaNp73 expression in the cells transfected with sh-Nrf-2 as well as Nrf-2 knock out mouse model. However, we found Nrf-2 induced DeltaNp73 expression was abolished with 5-aza-dC treatment, thus lead to a down-regulated DeltaNp73 and an up-regulated TAp73 expression in breast cancer cells lines. Consistent with this model, we detected decreased TAp73 and increased DeltaNp73 expression in breast cancer tissue, along with increased TAp73 but decreased DeltaNp73 expression in corresponding surrounding noncancerous tissues (NCTs) in a breast cancer tissue assay. A significant inverse correlation was found between TAp73 and DeltaNp73 expression in the above tissue-array (P = 0.047) and validated in another set consisting of 128 breast cancer tumor tissue (P = 0.034). Taken together, our findings suggest that Nrf-2 and promoter methylation cooperatively govern the transcriptional regulation of p73, and unbalanced expression of TAp73 and DeltaNp73 expression plays a critical role in breast cancer development.. To understand the transcriptional regulation of p73 by promoter methylation and Nrf-2 in breast carcinogenesis, ChIP assay indicated that Nrf-2 can bind to both promoters and can activate the transcription of TAp73 and DeltaNp73 in MCF-7 cell line, knockdown of Nrf-2 gene resulted in an abrogation of TAp73 and DeltaNp73 expression in the cells transfected with sh-Nrf-2 as well as Nrf-2 knock out mouse model. However, we found Nrf-2 induced DeltaNp73 expression was abolished with 5-aza-dC treatment, thus lead to a down-regulated DeltaNp73 and an up-regulated TAp73 expression in breast cancer cells lines. Consistent with this model, we detected decreased TAp73 and increased DeltaNp73 expression in breast cancer tissue, along with increased TAp73 but decreased DeltaNp73 expression in corresponding surrounding noncancerous tissues (NCTs) in a breast cancer tissue assay. A significant inverse correlation was found between TAp73 and DeltaNp73 expression in the above tissue-array (P = 0.047) and validated in another set consisting of 128 breast cancer tumor tissue (P = 0.034). Taken together, our findings suggest that Nrf-2 and promoter methylation cooperatively govern the transcriptional regulation of p73, and unbalanced expression of TAp73 and DeltaNp73 expression plays a critical role in breast cancer development.

The three genes encoding small noncoding microRNA (miR)34a, MIR34b and MIR34c act as tumorsuppressor genes. Their aberrant expressions regulated by DNA methylation have been frequently found in various types of cancer. In the present study, the DNA promoter methylation profiles of the MIR34 gene family were analyzed using the methylation specific polymerase chain reaction in order to clarify their association with breast and lung cancer, noncancerous or normal adjacent tissues. The methylation frequency of MIR34a was significantly higher in breast cancer (49.37%) compared with normal adjacent tissues (30.38%). The methylation frequency of MIR34b/c was 59.49 and 62.03% in breast cancer and normal adjacent tissues, respectively. MIR34a methylation showed a significant concordance with that of MIR34b/c only in breast cancer tissue. MIR34a methylation was significantly associated with cancer and the invasive ductal carcinoma type of breast cancer (P=0.015 and P=0.02, respectively). Methylation frequency of MIR34a and MIR34b/c was 48.42 and 56.84% in lung cancer, and 47.22 and 51.39% in pulmonary diseases, respectively. No significant association was observed between the methylation status of MIR34a and MIR34b/c, and the clinicopathological features of lung cancer or with those of noncancerous pulmonary diseases. Promoter methylation of MIR34a and MIR34b/c occurs frequently and concomitantly in breast and lung cancer, as well as in pulmonary diseases tissues, but not in breast normal tissues adjacent to tumor. These results of the present study emphasize the involvement of MIR34 methylation in human diseases, including cancer. Furthermore, MIR34a methylation may be a promising marker for a subtype of breast cancer.. The three genes encoding small noncoding microRNA (miR)34a, MIR34b and MIR34c act as tumorsuppressor genes. Their aberrant expressions regulated by DNA methylation have been frequently found in various types of cancer. In the present study, the DNA promoter methylation profiles of the MIR34 gene family were analyzed using the methylation specific polymerase chain reaction in order to clarify their association with breast and lung cancer, noncancerous or normal adjacent tissues. The methylation frequency of MIR34a was significantly higher in breast cancer (49.37%) compared with normal adjacent tissues (30.38%). The methylation frequency of MIR34b/c was 59.49 and 62.03% in breast cancer and normal adjacent tissues, respectively. MIR34a methylation showed a significant concordance with that of MIR34b/c only in breast cancer tissue. MIR34a methylation was significantly associated with cancer and the invasive ductal carcinoma type of breast cancer (P=0.015 and P=0.02, respectively). Methylation frequency of MIR34a and MIR34b/c was 48.42 and 56.84% in lung cancer, and 47.22 and 51.39% in pulmonary diseases, respectively. No significant association was observed between the methylation status of MIR34a and MIR34b/c, and the clinicopathological features of lung cancer or with those of noncancerous pulmonary diseases. Promoter methylation of MIR34a and MIR34b/c occurs frequently and concomitantly in breast and lung cancer, as well as in pulmonary diseases tissues, but not in breast normal tissues adjacent to tumor. These results of the present study emphasize the involvement of MIR34 methylation in human diseases, including cancer. Furthermore, MIR34a methylation may be a promising marker for a subtype of breast cancer.

Hormonal factors have a profound influence on the development, treatment, and outcome of breast cancer. The absence of steroid hormone receptors is highly correlated with resistance to antihormonal treatments. Work in cultured human breast cancer cell lines has shown that the absence of estrogen receptor (ER) gene expression in ER- cells is associated with extensive methylation of the ER gene 5' CpG island, and treatment with agents that demethylate the ER gene CpG island results in the production of functional ER protein. The current study shows that CpG islands in the 5' region of the ER and progesterone receptor (PR) genes are methylated in a significant fraction of primary human breast cancer tissues. The ER CpG island is methylated at the methylation-sensitive NotI restriction site in 9 of 39 (25%) of primary ER- breast cancers but remains unmethylated in 53 ER+ breast cancers and 9 normal breast specimens. Three methylation-sensitive restriction sites in the PR gene CpG island are not methylated in normal breast specimens and PR+ human breast cancers but are hypermethylated in 40% of PR- human breast tumors. These data demonstrate that methylation of the ER and PR gene CpG islands is associated with the lack of ER and PR gene expression in a significant fraction of human breast cancers.. Hormonal factors have a profound influence on the development, treatment, and outcome of breast cancer. The absence of steroid hormone receptors is highly correlated with resistance to antihormonal treatments. Work in cultured human breast cancer cell lines has shown that the absence of estrogen receptor (ER) gene expression in ER- cells is associated with extensive methylation of the ER gene 5' CpG island, and treatment with agents that demethylate the ER gene CpG island results in the production of functional ER protein. The current study shows that CpG islands in the 5' region of the ER and progesterone receptor (PR) genes are methylated in a significant fraction of primary human breast cancer tissues. The ER CpG island is methylated at the methylation-sensitive NotI restriction site in 9 of 39 (25%) of primary ER- breast cancers but remains unmethylated in 53 ER+ breast cancers and 9 normal breast specimens. Three methylation-sensitive restriction sites in the PR gene CpG island are not methylated in normal breast specimens and PR+ human breast cancers but are hypermethylated in 40% of PR- human breast tumors. These data demonstrate that methylation of the ER and PR gene CpG islands is associated with the lack of ER and PR gene expression in a significant fraction of human breast cancers.

(1) Background: Epithelial(-)mesenchymal plasticity (EMP) is a dynamic process whereby epithelial carcinoma cells reversibly acquire morphological and invasive characteristics typical of mesenchymal cells. Identifying the methylation differences between epithelial and mesenchymal states may assist in the identification of optimal DNA methylation biomarkers for the blood-based monitoring of cancer. (2) Methods: Methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) was used to examine the promoter methylation status of a panel of established and novel markers in a range of breast cancer cell lines spanning the epithelial(-)mesenchymal spectrum. Pyrosequencing was used to validate the MS-HRM results. (3) Results: VIM, DKK3, and CRABP1 were methylated in the majority of epithelial breast cancer cell lines, while methylation of GRHL2, MIR200C, and CDH1 was restricted to mesenchymal cell lines. Some markers that have been used to assess minimal residual disease such as AKR1B1 and APC methylation proved to be specific for epithelial breast cell lines. However, RASSF1A, RARbeta, TWIST1, and SFRP2 methylation was seen in both epithelial and mesenchymal cell lines, supporting their suitability for a multimarker panel. (4) Conclusions: Profiling DNA methylation shows a distinction between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes. Understanding how DNA methylation varies between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes may lead to more rational selection of methylation-based biomarkers for circulating tumour DNA analysis.. (1) Background: Epithelial(-)mesenchymal plasticity (EMP) is a dynamic process whereby epithelial carcinoma cells reversibly acquire morphological and invasive characteristics typical of mesenchymal cells. Identifying the methylation differences between epithelial and mesenchymal states may assist in the identification of optimal DNA methylation biomarkers for the blood-based monitoring of cancer. (2) Methods: Methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) was used to examine the promoter methylation status of a panel of established and novel markers in a range of breast cancer cell lines spanning the epithelial(-)mesenchymal spectrum. Pyrosequencing was used to validate the MS-HRM results. (3) Results: VIM, DKK3, and CRABP1 were methylated in the majority of epithelial breast cancer cell lines, while methylation of GRHL2, MIR200C, and CDH1 was restricted to mesenchymal cell lines. Some markers that have been used to assess minimal residual disease such as AKR1B1 and APC methylation proved to be specific for epithelial breast cell lines. However, RASSF1A, RARbeta, TWIST1, and SFRP2 methylation was seen in both epithelial and mesenchymal cell lines, supporting their suitability for a multimarker panel. (4) Conclusions: Profiling DNA methylation shows a distinction between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes. Understanding how DNA methylation varies between epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes may lead to more rational selection of methylation-based biomarkers for circulating tumour DNA analysis.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) is a member of a large conserved superfamily of steroid hormone nuclear receptors which regulates many physiological pathways by acting as a ligand-dependent transcription factor. Evidence is emerging that estrogens also induce rapid signaling to the downstream kinase cascades; however the mechanisms underlying this nongenomic function remain poorly understood. We have recently shown that ERalpha is methylated specifically by the arginine methyltransferase PRMT1 at arginine 260 in the DNA-binding domain of the receptor. This methylation event is required for mediating the extra-nuclear function of the receptor which would thereby interact with Src/FAK and p85 and propagate the signal to downstream transduction cascades that orchestrate cell proliferation and survival. Of particular interest, a possible role of methylated ERalpha in mammary tumorigenesis is also evident by the fact that, as demonstrated by immunohistochemical studies on a cohort of breast cancer patients, ERalpha is methylated in normal epithelial breast cells and is hypermethylated in a subset of breast cancers. Hypermethylation of ERalpha in breast cancer might cause hyperactivation of cellular kinase signaling, notably of Akt, described as a selective survival advantage for primary tumor cells even in the presence of anti-estrogens. A detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms that control estrogen signaling in breast cancer is a crucial step in identifying new effective therapies.. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) is a member of a large conserved superfamily of steroid hormone nuclear receptors which regulates many physiological pathways by acting as a ligand-dependent transcription factor. Evidence is emerging that estrogens also induce rapid signaling to the downstream kinase cascades; however the mechanisms underlying this nongenomic function remain poorly understood. We have recently shown that ERalpha is methylated specifically by the arginine methyltransferase PRMT1 at arginine 260 in the DNA-binding domain of the receptor. This methylation event is required for mediating the extra-nuclear function of the receptor which would thereby interact with Src/FAK and p85 and propagate the signal to downstream transduction cascades that orchestrate cell proliferation and survival. Of particular interest, a possible role of methylated ERalpha in mammary tumorigenesis is also evident by the fact that, as demonstrated by immunohistochemical studies on a cohort of breast cancer patients, ERalpha is methylated in normal epithelial breast cells and is hypermethylated in a subset of breast cancers. Hypermethylation of ERalpha in breast cancer might cause hyperactivation of cellular kinase signaling, notably of Akt, described as a selective survival advantage for primary tumor cells even in the presence of anti-estrogens. A detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms that control estrogen signaling in breast cancer is a crucial step in identifying new effective therapies.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a complex disease in which different genomic patterns exists depending on different subtypes. Recent researches present that multiple subtypes of breast cancer occur at different rates, and play a crucial role in planning treatment. To better understand underlying biological mechanisms on breast cancer subtypes, investigating the specific gene regulatory system via different subtypes is desirable. METHODS: Gene expression, as an intermediate phenotype, is estimated based on methylation profiles to identify the impact of epigenomic features on transcriptomic changes in breast cancer. We propose a kernel weighted l1-regularized regression model to incorporate tumor subtype information and further reveal gene regulations affected by different breast cancer subtypes. For the proper control of subtype-specific estimation, samples from different breast cancer subtype are learned at different rate based on target estimates. Kolmogorov Smirnov test is conducted to determine learning rate of each sample from different subtype. RESULTS: It is observed that genes that might be sensitive to breast cancer subtype show prediction improvement when estimated using our proposed method. Comparing to a standard method, overall performance is also enhanced by incorporating tumor subtypes. In addition, we identified subtype-specific network structures based on the associations between gene expression and DNA methylation. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, kernel weighted lasso model is proposed for identifying subtype-specific associations between gene expressions and DNA methylation profiles. Identification of subtype-specific gene expression associated with epigenomic changes might be helpful for better planning treatment and developing new therapies.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a complex disease in which different genomic patterns exists depending on different subtypes. Recent researches present that multiple subtypes of breast cancer occur at different rates, and play a crucial role in planning treatment. To better understand underlying biological mechanisms on breast cancer subtypes, investigating the specific gene regulatory system via different subtypes is desirable. METHODS: Gene expression, as an intermediate phenotype, is estimated based on methylation profiles to identify the impact of epigenomic features on transcriptomic changes in breast cancer. We propose a kernel weighted l1-regularized regression model to incorporate tumor subtype information and further reveal gene regulations affected by different breast cancer subtypes. For the proper control of subtype-specific estimation, samples from different breast cancer subtype are learned at different rate based on target estimates. Kolmogorov Smirnov test is conducted to determine learning rate of each sample from different subtype. RESULTS: It is observed that genes that might be sensitive to breast cancer subtype show prediction improvement when estimated using our proposed method. Comparing to a standard method, overall performance is also enhanced by incorporating tumor subtypes. In addition, we identified subtype-specific network structures based on the associations between gene expression and DNA methylation. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, kernel weighted lasso model is proposed for identifying subtype-specific associations between gene expressions and DNA methylation profiles. Identification of subtype-specific gene expression associated with epigenomic changes might be helpful for better planning treatment and developing new therapies.

BACKGROUND: The p16(INK4a) gene methylation has been reported to be a major tumorigenic mechanism. METHODS: We evaluated the methylation status of the p16(INK4a) genes in 231 invasive breast cancer and 90 intraductal carcinoma specimens using a methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and p16 protein expression using immunohistochemistry. The quantity of cell-free methylated p16(INK4a) DNA in the plasma samples of 200 patients with invasive breast cancer was also examined using a fluorescence-based real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. RESULTS: The frequencies of p16(INK4a) methylation in invasive and intraductal tumors were 52.8% (122/231) and 57.8% (52/90), respectively. The p16 protein was overexpressed in 145 of the 231 invasive carcinomas (62.8%) and 63 of the 90 intraductal carcinomas (70%). High p16 expression in invasive carcinomas correlated significantly with a high histologic grade, a negative estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status, p53 immunoreactivity and high Ki-67 expression with immunohistochemistry. In addition, the methylation index of p16(INK4a) was significantly higher in the cancer patients than the normal controls (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: High p16 immunoreactivity correlated with a loss of differentiation in breast carcinomas and high frequency of p16(INK4a) promoter methylation in both invasive and intraductal carcinomas, suggesting it may be involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: The p16(INK4a) gene methylation has been reported to be a major tumorigenic mechanism. METHODS: We evaluated the methylation status of the p16(INK4a) genes in 231 invasive breast cancer and 90 intraductal carcinoma specimens using a methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and p16 protein expression using immunohistochemistry. The quantity of cell-free methylated p16(INK4a) DNA in the plasma samples of 200 patients with invasive breast cancer was also examined using a fluorescence-based real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. RESULTS: The frequencies of p16(INK4a) methylation in invasive and intraductal tumors were 52.8% (122/231) and 57.8% (52/90), respectively. The p16 protein was overexpressed in 145 of the 231 invasive carcinomas (62.8%) and 63 of the 90 intraductal carcinomas (70%). High p16 expression in invasive carcinomas correlated significantly with a high histologic grade, a negative estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status, p53 immunoreactivity and high Ki-67 expression with immunohistochemistry. In addition, the methylation index of p16(INK4a) was significantly higher in the cancer patients than the normal controls (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: High p16 immunoreactivity correlated with a loss of differentiation in breast carcinomas and high frequency of p16(INK4a) promoter methylation in both invasive and intraductal carcinomas, suggesting it may be involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

Recent microarray profiling studies on breast cancer have identified distinct subtypes that are associated with different clinical outcomes. Promoter hypermethylation of several known or putative tumor suppressor genes occurs frequently during the pathogenesis of breast cancer. We proposed that immunohistopathologic subtypes of breast cancer are likely to contain distinct promoter methylation patterns. A panel of 10 gene promoters was assessed by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR in 114 invasive ductal carcinomas from Korea representing the three major subtypes [57 luminal, 24 human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2), and 33 basal-like] based on immunohistochemical findings of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, HER2, cytokeratin 5/6 and epidermal growth factor receptor. The median methylation levels of HIN1, RASSF1A and TWIST, and the average methylation ratio were significantly lower in basal-like subtype compared to luminal or HER2 subtypes. In contrast, BRCA1 methylation level was significantly higher in basal-like subtype than in luminal subtype. The methylation status of a panel of four genes (APC1, CDH, BRCA1 and RAR-beta) in luminal and HER2 subtypes were dissimilar, where HER2 tumors showed a significantly higher level of methylation compared to luminal tumors. These results suggest that gene methylation in breast cancer can potentially serve as epigenetic biomarkers and may contribute further to current breast cancer classification.. Recent microarray profiling studies on breast cancer have identified distinct subtypes that are associated with different clinical outcomes. Promoter hypermethylation of several known or putative tumor suppressor genes occurs frequently during the pathogenesis of breast cancer. We proposed that immunohistopathologic subtypes of breast cancer are likely to contain distinct promoter methylation patterns. A panel of 10 gene promoters was assessed by quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR in 114 invasive ductal carcinomas from Korea representing the three major subtypes [57 luminal, 24 human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2), and 33 basal-like] based on immunohistochemical findings of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, HER2, cytokeratin 5/6 and epidermal growth factor receptor. The median methylation levels of HIN1, RASSF1A and TWIST, and the average methylation ratio were significantly lower in basal-like subtype compared to luminal or HER2 subtypes. In contrast, BRCA1 methylation level was significantly higher in basal-like subtype than in luminal subtype. The methylation status of a panel of four genes (APC1, CDH, BRCA1 and RAR-beta) in luminal and HER2 subtypes were dissimilar, where HER2 tumors showed a significantly higher level of methylation compared to luminal tumors. These results suggest that gene methylation in breast cancer can potentially serve as epigenetic biomarkers and may contribute further to current breast cancer classification.

To test whether promoter hypermethylation in breast cancer provides a basis for the interethnic difference in breast cancer incidence and distribution, we compared the methylation profiles of tumors arising in native Korean women with Caucasian women in the United States. Methylation-specific PCR analysis of seven genes frequently methylated in breast cancer (HIN-1, Twist, Cyclin D2, RARbeta, GSTP1, RASSF1A and CDH1) was performed on DNA from 67 Korean and 50 Caucasian invasive ductal breast cancers which were categorized into four subgroups by ER status and age. Methylation frequencies for individual genes were similar between the two races. However, tumors in Korean women of age (< or = 50) at diagnosis had a trend of higher prevalence of promoter hypermethylation for all seven genes compared to those in women at an older age (> 50). Furthermore, methylation of multiple genes (four or more genes per case) was associated with younger age at diagnosis (OR = 3.2; 95% CI = 1.2-8.7; p = 0.03). In contrast, there was no association between promoter hypermethylation and age at diagnosis in Caucasian women. A significantly higher frequency of methylation, for all seven genes and in multiple genes, was observed in ER-/PR breast carcinomas in Korean women of age < or = 50 compared to the same subgroup of tumors in Caucasians. In contrast, compared to Korean breast cancer, the subgroup of ER+/PR+ breast carcinomas arising in Caucasian women age > 50 had a significantly higher frequency of methylation in three of seven genes. Our data suggest that promoter hypermethylation is a prevalent phenomenon in breast cancer of young Korean women. By analyzing the methylation patterns in tumors stratified by race, ER/PR status, and age, dissimilarities in promoter hypermethylation profiles, particularly in the ER-/PR- tumors arising in young women, were revealed that characterize tumors of one ethnicity from the other.. To test whether promoter hypermethylation in breast cancer provides a basis for the interethnic difference in breast cancer incidence and distribution, we compared the methylation profiles of tumors arising in native Korean women with Caucasian women in the United States. Methylation-specific PCR analysis of seven genes frequently methylated in breast cancer (HIN-1, Twist, Cyclin D2, RARbeta, GSTP1, RASSF1A and CDH1) was performed on DNA from 67 Korean and 50 Caucasian invasive ductal breast cancers which were categorized into four subgroups by ER status and age. Methylation frequencies for individual genes were similar between the two races. However, tumors in Korean women of age (< or = 50) at diagnosis had a trend of higher prevalence of promoter hypermethylation for all seven genes compared to those in women at an older age (> 50). Furthermore, methylation of multiple genes (four or more genes per case) was associated with younger age at diagnosis (OR = 3.2; 95% CI = 1.2-8.7; p = 0.03). In contrast, there was no association between promoter hypermethylation and age at diagnosis in Caucasian women. A significantly higher frequency of methylation, for all seven genes and in multiple genes, was observed in ER-/PR breast carcinomas in Korean women of age < or = 50 compared to the same subgroup of tumors in Caucasians. In contrast, compared to Korean breast cancer, the subgroup of ER+/PR+ breast carcinomas arising in Caucasian women age > 50 had a significantly higher frequency of methylation in three of seven genes. Our data suggest that promoter hypermethylation is a prevalent phenomenon in breast cancer of young Korean women. By analyzing the methylation patterns in tumors stratified by race, ER/PR status, and age, dissimilarities in promoter hypermethylation profiles, particularly in the ER-/PR- tumors arising in young women, were revealed that characterize tumors of one ethnicity from the other.

Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common cancers in both women and female dogs. Methylation changes of LINE-1 have been reported in human cancers. The aim of this study was to determine the hypomethylation of canine LINE-1 in liquid biopsies for canine mammary tumors (CMT) and to assess its diagnostic performance in human plasma. BC associated LINE-1 methylation was measured by methylation sensitive (HpaII) and insensitive (MspI) restriction enzyme digestion followed by real-time PCR using the cfDNA isolated from 300 microl of plasma. The relative level of methylated canine LINE-1 was less than 0.4 in the benign and malignant CMTs (0.29 +/- 0.061 and 0.39 +/- 0.066, respectively) when it was 0.92 +/- 0.067 in the healthy controls. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was significantly high in both benign and malignant tumors (0.97 and 0.93). Furthermore, this approach was also successfully implemented in a set of 26 human BCs with 10 healthy controls (AUC = 0.78). Altogether, our data suggest that the comparative approach using a dog model might be helpful to rapidly develop a new diagnostic biomarker and that the methylation of LINE-1 in cfDNA may be a good target as a diagnostic marker of both human BC and CMT.. Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common cancers in both women and female dogs. Methylation changes of LINE-1 have been reported in human cancers. The aim of this study was to determine the hypomethylation of canine LINE-1 in liquid biopsies for canine mammary tumors (CMT) and to assess its diagnostic performance in human plasma. BC associated LINE-1 methylation was measured by methylation sensitive (HpaII) and insensitive (MspI) restriction enzyme digestion followed by real-time PCR using the cfDNA isolated from 300 microl of plasma. The relative level of methylated canine LINE-1 was less than 0.4 in the benign and malignant CMTs (0.29 +/- 0.061 and 0.39 +/- 0.066, respectively) when it was 0.92 +/- 0.067 in the healthy controls. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was significantly high in both benign and malignant tumors (0.97 and 0.93). Furthermore, this approach was also successfully implemented in a set of 26 human BCs with 10 healthy controls (AUC = 0.78). Altogether, our data suggest that the comparative approach using a dog model might be helpful to rapidly develop a new diagnostic biomarker and that the methylation of LINE-1 in cfDNA may be a good target as a diagnostic marker of both human BC and CMT.

Sex steroid hormones contribute to breast cancer development, but data on concentrations of these within breast tissue are limited. We performed simultaneous multiparameter measurement of breast sex steroids, breast epithelial cytology, and DNA methylation in 119 healthy women (54 pre- and 65 postmenopausal) without a history of breast cancer. Random fine-needle aspiration (rFNA) of the breast was performed simultaneously with blood collection. Breast samples were analyzed by LC/MS-MS for estrone, estradiol, progesterone, androstenedione, and testosterone. Blood samples were assayed for estradiol and progesterone by immunoassay. Cytomorphology was classified using the Masood Score, and DNA methylation of eight genes was analyzed using quantitative multiplexed methylation-specific PCR, and expressed as the cumulative methylation index (CMI). Serum and breast concentrations of estradiol and progesterone showed significant correlation (Spearman r = 0.34, Padj = 0.001 and r = 0.69, Padj < 0.0006, respectively). Progesterone concentration was significantly higher in the premenopausal breast (Padj < 0.0008), and showed a luteal surge. Breast estrone and estradiol concentrations did not differ significantly by menopause, but androstenedione concentration was higher in the breasts of postmenopausal women (P = 0.026 and Padj = 0.208). Breast androgens were significantly correlated with breast density (Spearman r = 0.27, Padj = 0.02 for testosterone) and CMI (Spearman r = 0.3, Padj = 0.038 for androstenedione). Our data indicate that future larger studies of breast steroid hormones along with other parameters are feasible. Significant associations of breast androgen concentrations with breast density and gene methylation warrant future study. Cancer Prev Res; 11(9); 557-68. (c)2018 AACR.. Sex steroid hormones contribute to breast cancer development, but data on concentrations of these within breast tissue are limited. We performed simultaneous multiparameter measurement of breast sex steroids, breast epithelial cytology, and DNA methylation in 119 healthy women (54 pre- and 65 postmenopausal) without a history of breast cancer. Random fine-needle aspiration (rFNA) of the breast was performed simultaneously with blood collection. Breast samples were analyzed by LC/MS-MS for estrone, estradiol, progesterone, androstenedione, and testosterone. Blood samples were assayed for estradiol and progesterone by immunoassay. Cytomorphology was classified using the Masood Score, and DNA methylation of eight genes was analyzed using quantitative multiplexed methylation-specific PCR, and expressed as the cumulative methylation index (CMI). Serum and breast concentrations of estradiol and progesterone showed significant correlation (Spearman r = 0.34, Padj = 0.001 and r = 0.69, Padj < 0.0006, respectively). Progesterone concentration was significantly higher in the premenopausal breast (Padj < 0.0008), and showed a luteal surge. Breast estrone and estradiol concentrations did not differ significantly by menopause, but androstenedione concentration was higher in the breasts of postmenopausal women (P = 0.026 and Padj = 0.208). Breast androgens were significantly correlated with breast density (Spearman r = 0.27, Padj = 0.02 for testosterone) and CMI (Spearman r = 0.3, Padj = 0.038 for androstenedione). Our data indicate that future larger studies of breast steroid hormones along with other parameters are feasible. Significant associations of breast androgen concentrations with breast density and gene methylation warrant future study. Cancer Prev Res; 11(9); 557-68. (c)2018 AACR.

Aberrant DNA methylation of regulatory sequences is a well-documented mechanism of functional deletion of genes with anti-tumourigenic properties including microRNAs. This review discusses the publications describing aberrant methylation of microRNA genes in human breast cancer cells. Among the anti-tumourigenic properties of epigenetically inactivated microRNA genes, the inhibition of proliferation and of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are the best studied. Several studies are conceptually very interesting and present a comprehensive functional characterization of anti-tumorigenic microRNAs. The link between microRNA expression and gene methylation is not addressed directly by all studies and a number of studies are limited in their strength by not including primary breast cancer specimens or by analysing very small sets of primary human specimens. The publications cover a wide range of DNA methylation detection techniques, often making direct comparison of results challenging. Despite the identification and thorough characterization of many interesting candidates and functionally important microRNA genes affected by DNA methylation, the translation of microRNA gene methylation as a new biomarker into the daily routine practice has not yet worked out.. Aberrant DNA methylation of regulatory sequences is a well-documented mechanism of functional deletion of genes with anti-tumourigenic properties including microRNAs. This review discusses the publications describing aberrant methylation of microRNA genes in human breast cancer cells. Among the anti-tumourigenic properties of epigenetically inactivated microRNA genes, the inhibition of proliferation and of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are the best studied. Several studies are conceptually very interesting and present a comprehensive functional characterization of anti-tumorigenic microRNAs. The link between microRNA expression and gene methylation is not addressed directly by all studies and a number of studies are limited in their strength by not including primary breast cancer specimens or by analysing very small sets of primary human specimens. The publications cover a wide range of DNA methylation detection techniques, often making direct comparison of results challenging. Despite the identification and thorough characterization of many interesting candidates and functionally important microRNA genes affected by DNA methylation, the translation of microRNA gene methylation as a new biomarker into the daily routine practice has not yet worked out.

The aberrant methylation of cytosine residues in the promoter region of growth-regulatory genes is now recognized as an important inactivation mechanism in addition to deletion and mutation in the development and progression of cancer. Principally all pathways regulating proliferation and differentiation, which are perturbed in cancer cells, can be affected. In breast cancer epigenetic inactivation is a frequent and early event displaying great quantitative gene-specific differences during progression. The occurrence of specific aberrant methylation patterns is associated with the histological grade and subtype of mammary carcinoma biopsies.. The aberrant methylation of cytosine residues in the promoter region of growth-regulatory genes is now recognized as an important inactivation mechanism in addition to deletion and mutation in the development and progression of cancer. Principally all pathways regulating proliferation and differentiation, which are perturbed in cancer cells, can be affected. In breast cancer epigenetic inactivation is a frequent and early event displaying great quantitative gene-specific differences during progression. The occurrence of specific aberrant methylation patterns is associated with the histological grade and subtype of mammary carcinoma biopsies.

One of the supposed mechanisms that may lead to breast cancer (BC) is an alteration of circadian gene expression and DNA methylation. We undertook an integrated approach to identify methylation pattern of core circadian promoter regions in BC patients with regard to clinical features. We performed a quantitative methylation-specific real-time PCR analysis of a promoter methylation profile in 107 breast tumor and matched non-tumor tissues. A panel of circadian genes CLOCK, BMAL1, PERIOD (PER1, 2, 3), CRYPTOCHROME (CRY1, 2) and TIMELESS as well as their association with clinicopathological characteristics were included in the analysis. Three out of the eight analyzed genes exhibited marked hypermethylation (PER1, 2, 3), whereas CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY2 showed significantly lower promoter CpG methylation in the BC tissues when compared to the non-tumor tissues. Among variously methylated genes we found an association between the elevated methylation level of PERs promoter region and molecular subtypes, histological subtypes and tumor grading of BC. Methylation status may be associated with a gene expression level of circadian genes in BC patients. An aberrant methylation pattern in circadian genes in BC may provide information that could be used as novel biomarkers in clinics and molecular epidemiology as well as play an important role in BC etiology.. One of the supposed mechanisms that may lead to breast cancer (BC) is an alteration of circadian gene expression and DNA methylation. We undertook an integrated approach to identify methylation pattern of core circadian promoter regions in BC patients with regard to clinical features. We performed a quantitative methylation-specific real-time PCR analysis of a promoter methylation profile in 107 breast tumor and matched non-tumor tissues. A panel of circadian genes CLOCK, BMAL1, PERIOD (PER1, 2, 3), CRYPTOCHROME (CRY1, 2) and TIMELESS as well as their association with clinicopathological characteristics were included in the analysis. Three out of the eight analyzed genes exhibited marked hypermethylation (PER1, 2, 3), whereas CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY2 showed significantly lower promoter CpG methylation in the BC tissues when compared to the non-tumor tissues. Among variously methylated genes we found an association between the elevated methylation level of PERs promoter region and molecular subtypes, histological subtypes and tumor grading of BC. Methylation status may be associated with a gene expression level of circadian genes in BC patients. An aberrant methylation pattern in circadian genes in BC may provide information that could be used as novel biomarkers in clinics and molecular epidemiology as well as play an important role in BC etiology.

Gene silencing associated with aberrant methylation of promoter region CpG islands is one mechanism in which tumor suppressor genes are inactivated in human cancers. Recently, we identified a novel gene, Target of Methylation-associated Silencing-1 (TMS1) (also called ASC), which is aberrantly methylated and silenced in human breast cancers. To further investigate the mechanism of TMS1 silencing, we defined the transcription initiation site and detailed the DNA methylation pattern of the TMS1 CpG island in normal breast epithelial cells, breast cancer cell lines, and primary tumors. We find that in normal cells, the TMS1 CpG island lies within a 1.2 kb unmethylated domain, the 5' boundary of which is in close proximity to the transcription initiation site. In breast cancer cell lines, this boundary appeared to be unstable in that methylation tended to accumulate in the 5' end of the CpG island relative to normal epithelial cells. In contrast, the 3' methylation boundary remained intact. Gene silencing was not correlated with the methylation of specific CpG sites nor the inability to transactivate the TMS1 promoter, but was correlated with the percentage of alleles in the population exhibiting dense methylation across the entire CpG island. Using 5-aza-deoxycytidine to reactivate TMS1 in methylated and silent cell lines, and a cassette methylation strategy to determine the impact of methylation on different parts of the promoter, we find that demethylation of a small region immediately surrounding the transcription start site is critical to TMS1 expression. Our data support the idea that gene silencing and dense methylation are tightly coupled events that affect individual chromosomal copies of TMS1 in an all-or-none manner. The transition to this stably repressed state may be facilitated by spreading of methylation into the proximal promoter and direct effects of methylation on TMS1 transcription.. Gene silencing associated with aberrant methylation of promoter region CpG islands is one mechanism in which tumor suppressor genes are inactivated in human cancers. Recently, we identified a novel gene, Target of Methylation-associated Silencing-1 (TMS1) (also called ASC), which is aberrantly methylated and silenced in human breast cancers. To further investigate the mechanism of TMS1 silencing, we defined the transcription initiation site and detailed the DNA methylation pattern of the TMS1 CpG island in normal breast epithelial cells, breast cancer cell lines, and primary tumors. We find that in normal cells, the TMS1 CpG island lies within a 1.2 kb unmethylated domain, the 5' boundary of which is in close proximity to the transcription initiation site. In breast cancer cell lines, this boundary appeared to be unstable in that methylation tended to accumulate in the 5' end of the CpG island relative to normal epithelial cells. In contrast, the 3' methylation boundary remained intact. Gene silencing was not correlated with the methylation of specific CpG sites nor the inability to transactivate the TMS1 promoter, but was correlated with the percentage of alleles in the population exhibiting dense methylation across the entire CpG island. Using 5-aza-deoxycytidine to reactivate TMS1 in methylated and silent cell lines, and a cassette methylation strategy to determine the impact of methylation on different parts of the promoter, we find that demethylation of a small region immediately surrounding the transcription start site is critical to TMS1 expression. Our data support the idea that gene silencing and dense methylation are tightly coupled events that affect individual chromosomal copies of TMS1 in an all-or-none manner. The transition to this stably repressed state may be facilitated by spreading of methylation into the proximal promoter and direct effects of methylation on TMS1 transcription.

The normal epithelial cell-specific-1 (NES1)/kallikrein 10 gene is expressed in normal mammary epithelial cells, but its expression is dramatically decreased in breast cancer cell lines. Now, we have cloned and characterized the active promoter region of NES1. Using a luciferase reporter system, we demonstrate that most tumor cell lines are able to support full or partial transcription from the NES1 promoter, suggesting a role for promoter-independent cis-acting mechanisms of loss of NES1 expression. We show that hypermethylation of the NES1 gene represents one such mechanism. Using methylation-specific PCR and sequence analysis of sodium bisulfite-treated genomic DNA, we demonstrate a strong correlation between exon 3 hypermethylation and loss of NES1 mRNA expression in a panel of breast cancer cell lines and in primary tumors. Treatment of NES1-nonexpressing cells with a demethylating agent led to reexpression of NES1, suggesting an important role of hypermethylation in the loss of NES1 expression. We suggest that hypermethylation is responsible for tumor-specific loss of NES1 gene expression. Our results also suggest that hypermethylation of the NES1 gene may serve as a potential marker for breast cancer.. The normal epithelial cell-specific-1 (NES1)/kallikrein 10 gene is expressed in normal mammary epithelial cells, but its expression is dramatically decreased in breast cancer cell lines. Now, we have cloned and characterized the active promoter region of NES1. Using a luciferase reporter system, we demonstrate that most tumor cell lines are able to support full or partial transcription from the NES1 promoter, suggesting a role for promoter-independent cis-acting mechanisms of loss of NES1 expression. We show that hypermethylation of the NES1 gene represents one such mechanism. Using methylation-specific PCR and sequence analysis of sodium bisulfite-treated genomic DNA, we demonstrate a strong correlation between exon 3 hypermethylation and loss of NES1 mRNA expression in a panel of breast cancer cell lines and in primary tumors. Treatment of NES1-nonexpressing cells with a demethylating agent led to reexpression of NES1, suggesting an important role of hypermethylation in the loss of NES1 expression. We suggest that hypermethylation is responsible for tumor-specific loss of NES1 gene expression. Our results also suggest that hypermethylation of the NES1 gene may serve as a potential marker for breast cancer.

Background: The deadly costs of cancer and necessity for an accurate method of early cancer detection have demanded the identification of genetic and epigenetic factors associated with cancer. DNA methylation, an epigenetic event, plays an important role in cancer susceptibility. In this paper, we use DNA methylation and gene expression data integration and pathway analysis to further explore and understand the complex relationship between methylation and gene expression. Results: Through linear modeling and analysis of variance, we obtain genes that show a significant correlation between methylation and gene expression. We then examine the functions and relationships of these genes using bioinformatic tools and databases. In particular, using ConsensusPathDB, we analyze the networks of statistically significant genes to identify hub genes, genes with a large number of links to other genes. We identify eight major hub genes, all in strong association with cancer susceptibility. Through further analysis of the function, gene expression level, and methylation level of these hub genes, we conclude that they are novel potential biomarkers for breast cancer. Conclusions: Our findings have various implications for cancer screening, early detection methods, and potential novel treatments for cancer. Researchers can also use our results to develop more effective methods for cancer study.. Background: The deadly costs of cancer and necessity for an accurate method of early cancer detection have demanded the identification of genetic and epigenetic factors associated with cancer. DNA methylation, an epigenetic event, plays an important role in cancer susceptibility. In this paper, we use DNA methylation and gene expression data integration and pathway analysis to further explore and understand the complex relationship between methylation and gene expression. Results: Through linear modeling and analysis of variance, we obtain genes that show a significant correlation between methylation and gene expression. We then examine the functions and relationships of these genes using bioinformatic tools and databases. In particular, using ConsensusPathDB, we analyze the networks of statistically significant genes to identify hub genes, genes with a large number of links to other genes. We identify eight major hub genes, all in strong association with cancer susceptibility. Through further analysis of the function, gene expression level, and methylation level of these hub genes, we conclude that they are novel potential biomarkers for breast cancer. Conclusions: Our findings have various implications for cancer screening, early detection methods, and potential novel treatments for cancer. Researchers can also use our results to develop more effective methods for cancer study.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of mRNA of aspartyl/asparaginyl beta-hydroxylase (ASPH) gene in invasive breast cancer (IBC) and the relationship between methylation of gene promoter and clinicopathological parameters. METHODS: In 91 cases of breast cancer tissues and matched normal tissues (MNT),mRNA expression of the ASPH gene was detected by reverse transcription of real-time fluorescence quantification PCR and the methylation status of CpG island in the ASPH gene promoter region was detected by methylation specific PCR (MSP).And the relationship between the expression and the clinicopathological features of breast cancer was analyzed. RESULTS: The expression of ASPH gene mRNA in IBC was significantly higher than that in MNT ( P<0.001).The fold change of ASPH mRNA expression was related to whether E-cadherin was positive (r=0.195, P=0.041).The positive rate of methylation of ASPH gene promoter in breast cancer and MNT was 47.3% (43/91) and 89.0% (81/91). The methylation rate of gene promoter was correlated with E-cadherin and tumor size ( P<0.05). CONCLUSION: The mRNA expression and promoter methylation rate of ASPH gene may play a role in the development and progression of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of mRNA of aspartyl/asparaginyl beta-hydroxylase (ASPH) gene in invasive breast cancer (IBC) and the relationship between methylation of gene promoter and clinicopathological parameters. METHODS: In 91 cases of breast cancer tissues and matched normal tissues (MNT),mRNA expression of the ASPH gene was detected by reverse transcription of real-time fluorescence quantification PCR and the methylation status of CpG island in the ASPH gene promoter region was detected by methylation specific PCR (MSP).And the relationship between the expression and the clinicopathological features of breast cancer was analyzed. RESULTS: The expression of ASPH gene mRNA in IBC was significantly higher than that in MNT ( P<0.001).The fold change of ASPH mRNA expression was related to whether E-cadherin was positive (r=0.195, P=0.041).The positive rate of methylation of ASPH gene promoter in breast cancer and MNT was 47.3% (43/91) and 89.0% (81/91). The methylation rate of gene promoter was correlated with E-cadherin and tumor size ( P<0.05). CONCLUSION: The mRNA expression and promoter methylation rate of ASPH gene may play a role in the development and progression of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies revealed that tumor-specific gene methylation can be detected in the circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of cancer patients; therefore, methylated cfDNA is considered a promising biomarker. Human neuroblastoma breakpoint family member 1 (NBPF1) was originally identified in a neuroblastoma (NB) patient. The present study is the first to evaluate the presence of NBPF1 gene methylation in cfDNA in plasma of breast cancer patients. METHODS: Differentially methylated cfDNA was screened using bisulfite sequencing with a next-generation sequencer (BS-seq) among 25 breast cancer patients, 25 patients with a benign breast disease and 25 healthy female volunteers. Then, five specific methylation sites in the NBPF1 gene were verified in 11 breast cancer samples, and two further sites in the NBPF1 promoter were detected in 52 breast cancer patients (stages I-III), 31 patients with benign breast disease and 30 healthy controls by using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Furthermore, the association between the methylation statuses of NBPF1 and the clinicopathological characteristics of breast cancer patients was analyzed. RESULTS: BS-seq demonstrated that the NBPF1 methylation levels in breast cancer patients were higher than those in patients with benign breast disease and healthy controls. The MSP results showed that the methylation rates of two sites in the NBPF1 promoter were 67.1% and 61.4% in breast cancer patients, 48.2% and 59.6% in patients with benign breast disease, and 40.9% and 48.1% in healthy controls, respectively. The methylation rates of one site were significantly different among the three groups (p<.05), with the highest rate in breast cancer patients. Moreover, there was no statistically significant correlation between the NBPF1 promoter methylation and the major clinicopathological features of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that hypermethylation of the NBPF1 promoter occurs in a significant proportion of breast tumors and that NBPF1-methylated cfDNA may serve as a potential tumor marker for breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Recent studies revealed that tumor-specific gene methylation can be detected in the circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of cancer patients; therefore, methylated cfDNA is considered a promising biomarker. Human neuroblastoma breakpoint family member 1 (NBPF1) was originally identified in a neuroblastoma (NB) patient. The present study is the first to evaluate the presence of NBPF1 gene methylation in cfDNA in plasma of breast cancer patients. METHODS: Differentially methylated cfDNA was screened using bisulfite sequencing with a next-generation sequencer (BS-seq) among 25 breast cancer patients, 25 patients with a benign breast disease and 25 healthy female volunteers. Then, five specific methylation sites in the NBPF1 gene were verified in 11 breast cancer samples, and two further sites in the NBPF1 promoter were detected in 52 breast cancer patients (stages I-III), 31 patients with benign breast disease and 30 healthy controls by using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Furthermore, the association between the methylation statuses of NBPF1 and the clinicopathological characteristics of breast cancer patients was analyzed. RESULTS: BS-seq demonstrated that the NBPF1 methylation levels in breast cancer patients were higher than those in patients with benign breast disease and healthy controls. The MSP results showed that the methylation rates of two sites in the NBPF1 promoter were 67.1% and 61.4% in breast cancer patients, 48.2% and 59.6% in patients with benign breast disease, and 40.9% and 48.1% in healthy controls, respectively. The methylation rates of one site were significantly different among the three groups (p<.05), with the highest rate in breast cancer patients. Moreover, there was no statistically significant correlation between the NBPF1 promoter methylation and the major clinicopathological features of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that hypermethylation of the NBPF1 promoter occurs in a significant proportion of breast tumors and that NBPF1-methylated cfDNA may serve as a potential tumor marker for breast cancer.

DNA methylation is one of the most common epigenetic alterations, providing important information regarding cancer risk and prognosis. A case-control study (423 breast cancer cases, 509 controls) and a case-only study (326 cases) were conducted to evaluate the association of DUSP1 promoter methylation with breast cancer risk and clinicopathological characteristics. No significant association between DUSP1 methylation in peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA and breast cancer risk was observed. DUSP1 methylation was significantly associated with ER/PR-negative status; in particular, triple-negative breast cancer patients showed the highest frequency of DUSP1 methylation in both tumour DNA and PBL DNA. Soybean intake was significantly correlated with methylated DUSP1 only in ER-negative (OR 2.978; 95% CI 1.245-7.124) and PR negative (OR 2.735; 95% CI 1.315-5.692) patients. Irregular menstruation was significantly associated with methylated DUSP1 only in ER-positive (OR 3.564; 95% CI 1.691-7.511) and PR-positive (OR 3.902, 95% CI 1.656-9.194) patients. Thus, DUSP1 methylation is a cancer-associated hypermethylation event that is closely linked with triple-negative status. Further investigations are warranted to confirm the association of environmental factors, including fruit and soybean intake, irregular menstruation, and ER/PR status, with DUSP1 methylation in breast tumour DNA.. DNA methylation is one of the most common epigenetic alterations, providing important information regarding cancer risk and prognosis. A case-control study (423 breast cancer cases, 509 controls) and a case-only study (326 cases) were conducted to evaluate the association of DUSP1 promoter methylation with breast cancer risk and clinicopathological characteristics. No significant association between DUSP1 methylation in peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA and breast cancer risk was observed. DUSP1 methylation was significantly associated with ER/PR-negative status; in particular, triple-negative breast cancer patients showed the highest frequency of DUSP1 methylation in both tumour DNA and PBL DNA. Soybean intake was significantly correlated with methylated DUSP1 only in ER-negative (OR 2.978; 95% CI 1.245-7.124) and PR negative (OR 2.735; 95% CI 1.315-5.692) patients. Irregular menstruation was significantly associated with methylated DUSP1 only in ER-positive (OR 3.564; 95% CI 1.691-7.511) and PR-positive (OR 3.902, 95% CI 1.656-9.194) patients. Thus, DUSP1 methylation is a cancer-associated hypermethylation event that is closely linked with triple-negative status. Further investigations are warranted to confirm the association of environmental factors, including fruit and soybean intake, irregular menstruation, and ER/PR status, with DUSP1 methylation in breast tumour DNA.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a widely studied epigenetic mechanism known to correlate with gene repression and genomic stability. Development of sensitive methods for global detection of DNA methylation events is of particular importance. RESULTS: We here describe a technique, called modified methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MMSDK) based on methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MSDK) with a novel sequencing approach. Briefly, after a tandem digestion of genomic DNA with a methylation-sensitive mapping enzyme and a fragmenting enzyme, short sequence tags are obtained. These tags are amplified, followed by direct, massively parallel sequencing (Solexa 1G Genome Analyzer). This method allows high-throughput and low-cost genome-wide DNA methylation mapping. We applied this method to investigate global DNA methylation profiles for widely used breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, which are representatives for luminal-like and mesenchymal-like cancer types, respectively. By comparison, a highly similar overall DNA methylation pattern was revealed for the two cell lines. However a cohort of individual genomic loci with significantly different DNA methylation status between two cell lines was identified. Furthermore, we revealed a genome-wide significant correlation between gene expression and the methylation status of gene promoters with CpG islands (CGIs) in the two cancer cell lines, and a correlation of gene expression and the methylation status of promoters without CGIs in MCF-7 cells. CONCLUSION: The MMSDK method will be a valuable tool to increase the current knowledge of genome wide DNA methylation profiles.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a widely studied epigenetic mechanism known to correlate with gene repression and genomic stability. Development of sensitive methods for global detection of DNA methylation events is of particular importance. RESULTS: We here describe a technique, called modified methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MMSDK) based on methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MSDK) with a novel sequencing approach. Briefly, after a tandem digestion of genomic DNA with a methylation-sensitive mapping enzyme and a fragmenting enzyme, short sequence tags are obtained. These tags are amplified, followed by direct, massively parallel sequencing (Solexa 1G Genome Analyzer). This method allows high-throughput and low-cost genome-wide DNA methylation mapping. We applied this method to investigate global DNA methylation profiles for widely used breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, which are representatives for luminal-like and mesenchymal-like cancer types, respectively. By comparison, a highly similar overall DNA methylation pattern was revealed for the two cell lines. However a cohort of individual genomic loci with significantly different DNA methylation status between two cell lines was identified. Furthermore, we revealed a genome-wide significant correlation between gene expression and the methylation status of gene promoters with CpG islands (CGIs) in the two cancer cell lines, and a correlation of gene expression and the methylation status of promoters without CGIs in MCF-7 cells. CONCLUSION: The MMSDK method will be a valuable tool to increase the current knowledge of genome wide DNA methylation profiles.

Breast cancer is the most common malignant tumor in women worldwide. To explore the role of DACT2 in breast cancer, 5 cell lines and 153 cases of primary cancer were studied. The expression of DACT2 was detected in BT474, MDA-MB-231 and BT549 cells, while no expression was found in MDA-MB-468 and HBL100 cells. Complete methylation of DACT2 was found in MDA-MB-468 and HBL100 cells, partial methylation was observed in BT474 and BT549 cells, and no methylation was detected in MDA-MB-231 cells. Restoration of DACT2 expression was induced by 5-Aza in MDA-MB-468 and HBL100 cells. DACT2 was methylated in 49.7% (76/153) of primary breast cancer samples. Methylation of DACT2 was significantly associated with tumor size (P < 0.05). Reduced DACT2 expression was significantly associated with promoter region methylation in primary breast cancer (P < 0.05). DACT2 suppressed breast cancer cell growth and induced G1/S phase arrest in breast cancer cells. DACT2 inhibited Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in human breast cancer cells and suppressed breast cancer cell tumor growth in xenograft mice. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that DACT2 is frequently methylated in human breast cancer, methylation of DACT2 activates Wnt signaling, and DACT2 suppresses breast cancer cell growth both in vitro and in vivo.. Breast cancer is the most common malignant tumor in women worldwide. To explore the role of DACT2 in breast cancer, 5 cell lines and 153 cases of primary cancer were studied. The expression of DACT2 was detected in BT474, MDA-MB-231 and BT549 cells, while no expression was found in MDA-MB-468 and HBL100 cells. Complete methylation of DACT2 was found in MDA-MB-468 and HBL100 cells, partial methylation was observed in BT474 and BT549 cells, and no methylation was detected in MDA-MB-231 cells. Restoration of DACT2 expression was induced by 5-Aza in MDA-MB-468 and HBL100 cells. DACT2 was methylated in 49.7% (76/153) of primary breast cancer samples. Methylation of DACT2 was significantly associated with tumor size (P < 0.05). Reduced DACT2 expression was significantly associated with promoter region methylation in primary breast cancer (P < 0.05). DACT2 suppressed breast cancer cell growth and induced G1/S phase arrest in breast cancer cells. DACT2 inhibited Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in human breast cancer cells and suppressed breast cancer cell tumor growth in xenograft mice. In conclusion, our results demonstrate that DACT2 is frequently methylated in human breast cancer, methylation of DACT2 activates Wnt signaling, and DACT2 suppresses breast cancer cell growth both in vitro and in vivo.

DNA methylation is the main epigenetic modification that occurs at the early stages of carcinogenesis. We performed a genome-wide DNA methylation profiling to evaluate whether the DNA methylation state is different in the estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status of breast cancer. Twelve ER+/PR+ and 12 ER-/PR- breast cancer tissues were selected from the biorepository of the Seoul Breast Cancer Study for Infinium Methylation Assay. The difference of the DNA methylation state of 27 578 methylation sites in 14 000 genes between two groups was evaluated by Student's t-test. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated to evaluate the probability of false positive associations. Of the 27 578 sites, 148 sites (0.54%) were significantly different between ER+/PR+ and ER-/PR- breast cancers (P < 0.001); 93 hypermethylated and 55 hypomethylated. Five genes, FAM124B (P = 7.26 x 10(-7)), MANEAL (P = 3.38 x 10(-7)), ST6GALNAC1 (P = 2.85 x 10(-6)), NAV1 (P = 5.94 x 10(-6)) and PER1 (P = 6.45 x 10(-6)) remained significant after correction for multiple tests (FDR < 0.05). In a subsequent replication study for five genes, four of the five genes were validated; FAM124B and ST6GALNAC1 were significantly hypermethylated, and NAV1 and PER1 were significantly hypomethylated in ER+/PR+ breast cancers (P < 0.05). In the first genome-wide DNA methylation profiling according to the receptor status of breast cancer, we found that ER/PR status affects the DNA methylation state of FAM124B, ST6GALNAC1, NAV1 and PER1 in breast cancer.. DNA methylation is the main epigenetic modification that occurs at the early stages of carcinogenesis. We performed a genome-wide DNA methylation profiling to evaluate whether the DNA methylation state is different in the estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) status of breast cancer. Twelve ER+/PR+ and 12 ER-/PR- breast cancer tissues were selected from the biorepository of the Seoul Breast Cancer Study for Infinium Methylation Assay. The difference of the DNA methylation state of 27 578 methylation sites in 14 000 genes between two groups was evaluated by Student's t-test. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated to evaluate the probability of false positive associations. Of the 27 578 sites, 148 sites (0.54%) were significantly different between ER+/PR+ and ER-/PR- breast cancers (P < 0.001); 93 hypermethylated and 55 hypomethylated. Five genes, FAM124B (P = 7.26 x 10(-7)), MANEAL (P = 3.38 x 10(-7)), ST6GALNAC1 (P = 2.85 x 10(-6)), NAV1 (P = 5.94 x 10(-6)) and PER1 (P = 6.45 x 10(-6)) remained significant after correction for multiple tests (FDR < 0.05). In a subsequent replication study for five genes, four of the five genes were validated; FAM124B and ST6GALNAC1 were significantly hypermethylated, and NAV1 and PER1 were significantly hypomethylated in ER+/PR+ breast cancers (P < 0.05). In the first genome-wide DNA methylation profiling according to the receptor status of breast cancer, we found that ER/PR status affects the DNA methylation state of FAM124B, ST6GALNAC1, NAV1 and PER1 in breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Numerous studies reported RAS-association domain family 1 isoform A ( RASSF1A ) methylation might act as diagnostic biomarker for breast cancer (BC), this meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the value of RASSF1A methylation for diagnosing BC. METHODS: Such databases as PubMed, Cochrane Library and Web of Science databases were searched for literatures until May 2019. A meta-analysis was performed utilizing STATA and Revman softwares. Furthermore, subgroup analysis was adopted to determine likely sources of heterogeneity. RESULTS: Totally 19 literatures with 1849 patients and 1542 controls were included in this study. Sensitivity, specificity, diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) and the area under the summary receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of RASSF1A methylation for diagnosing BC was 0.49, 0.95, 19.0 and 0.83, respectively. The sensitivity (0.54 vs 0.43) , DOR (30.0 vs 10.0) and AUC (0.84 vs 0.81) of RASSF1A methylation in Caucasian were higher than other ethnicities. The sensitivity (0.64 vs 0.57), DOR (21.0 vs 14.0) and AUC (0.89 vs 0.86) of methylation-specific PCR (MSP) were superior to other methods (q-MSP, OS-MSP and MethyLight). The sensitivity, DOR and AUC of serum RASSF1A methylation vs RASSF1A methylation in other samples (tissue or plasma) were 0.55 vs 0.40, 22.0 vs 14.0 and 0.86 vs 0.74, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: RASSF1A methylation might be a potential diagnostic biomarker for BC. Considering its low sensitivity and high specificity, it should combine with others to upgrade the sensitivity. Besides, under such conditions as MSP detection, serum RASSF1A methylation and in Caucasian it shown more effective and suitable for diagnosing BC.. BACKGROUND: Numerous studies reported RAS-association domain family 1 isoform A ( RASSF1A ) methylation might act as diagnostic biomarker for breast cancer (BC), this meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the value of RASSF1A methylation for diagnosing BC. METHODS: Such databases as PubMed, Cochrane Library and Web of Science databases were searched for literatures until May 2019. A meta-analysis was performed utilizing STATA and Revman softwares. Furthermore, subgroup analysis was adopted to determine likely sources of heterogeneity. RESULTS: Totally 19 literatures with 1849 patients and 1542 controls were included in this study. Sensitivity, specificity, diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) and the area under the summary receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of RASSF1A methylation for diagnosing BC was 0.49, 0.95, 19.0 and 0.83, respectively. The sensitivity (0.54 vs 0.43) , DOR (30.0 vs 10.0) and AUC (0.84 vs 0.81) of RASSF1A methylation in Caucasian were higher than other ethnicities. The sensitivity (0.64 vs 0.57), DOR (21.0 vs 14.0) and AUC (0.89 vs 0.86) of methylation-specific PCR (MSP) were superior to other methods (q-MSP, OS-MSP and MethyLight). The sensitivity, DOR and AUC of serum RASSF1A methylation vs RASSF1A methylation in other samples (tissue or plasma) were 0.55 vs 0.40, 22.0 vs 14.0 and 0.86 vs 0.74, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: RASSF1A methylation might be a potential diagnostic biomarker for BC. Considering its low sensitivity and high specificity, it should combine with others to upgrade the sensitivity. Besides, under such conditions as MSP detection, serum RASSF1A methylation and in Caucasian it shown more effective and suitable for diagnosing BC.

Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers and is the second leading cause of cancer-related death in women worldwide. Ribosomal s6 kinase4 (RSK4) is a potential tumor suppressor in multiple cancers, while its role in breast cancer is largely unknown. Our study here aimed to explore the relationship between RSK4 expression with the clinicopathologic characteristics and the promoter methylation status of RSK4. Real-time PCR and bisulfite sequencing PCR were, respectively, used to detect the expression difference of RSK4 mRNA and RSK4 methylation in the 49 breast cancer and paired non-cancerous samples. The associations of RSK4 expression and methylation status with the clinicopathologic characteristics were analyzed. In the 49 breast cancer patients' specimens, RSK4 mRNA expression was found to be significantly decreased in most of breast cancer tissues compared with paired non-cancerous tissues (p = 0.002), which was largely due to the promoter hypermethylation (p = 0.005). Frequency of RSK4 promoter methylation in breast cancers was significantly higher than paired non-cancerous tissues (p = 0.009); RSK4 methylation was not associated with all clinicopathological features. The silencing of RSK4 due to promoter hypermethylation is a frequent event in breast cancer. The majority of cancers have a higher level of methylation status when compared with non-cancerous tissues. RSK4 may be a valuable biomarker for the study of breast cancer carcinogenesis and progression.. Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers and is the second leading cause of cancer-related death in women worldwide. Ribosomal s6 kinase4 (RSK4) is a potential tumor suppressor in multiple cancers, while its role in breast cancer is largely unknown. Our study here aimed to explore the relationship between RSK4 expression with the clinicopathologic characteristics and the promoter methylation status of RSK4. Real-time PCR and bisulfite sequencing PCR were, respectively, used to detect the expression difference of RSK4 mRNA and RSK4 methylation in the 49 breast cancer and paired non-cancerous samples. The associations of RSK4 expression and methylation status with the clinicopathologic characteristics were analyzed. In the 49 breast cancer patients' specimens, RSK4 mRNA expression was found to be significantly decreased in most of breast cancer tissues compared with paired non-cancerous tissues (p = 0.002), which was largely due to the promoter hypermethylation (p = 0.005). Frequency of RSK4 promoter methylation in breast cancers was significantly higher than paired non-cancerous tissues (p = 0.009); RSK4 methylation was not associated with all clinicopathological features. The silencing of RSK4 due to promoter hypermethylation is a frequent event in breast cancer. The majority of cancers have a higher level of methylation status when compared with non-cancerous tissues. RSK4 may be a valuable biomarker for the study of breast cancer carcinogenesis and progression.

BRCA1 is a susceptibility gene that has a genetic predisposition for breast cancer. BRCA1 gene mutation is closely associated with familial hereditary breast cancer, but the BRCA1 gene mutation is rarely found in sporadic breast cancer. According to previous studies, decreased expression of BRCA1 was detected in certain types of sporadic breast cancer. Aberrant methylation of DNA promoter CpG islands is one of the mechanisms by which tumor suppressor gene expression and function is lost. The aim of the present study was to investigate BRCA1 gene expression, methylation status and clinical significance in sporadic types of breast cancer. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and bisulfite sequencing PCR were respectively used to detect expression differences of BRCA1 mRNA and BRCA1 methylation in the 49 cancerous and paired non-cancerous samples from patients with breast cancer. The associations of BRCA1 expression and methylation status with the clinicopathologic characteristics were analysed. BRCA1 mRNA expression levels in the 49 breast cancer tissues were lower than those in the paired non-cancerous tissues. There was a significant statistical difference (P=0.001). BRCA1 mRNA expression was not associated with the main clinicopathologic characteristics. Frequency of the BRCA1 promoter methylation in the breast cancerous tissues was significantly higher than that in the non-cancerous tissues (P=0.007); BRCA1 gene methylation status was negatively correlated with mRNA expression (P=0.029); and BRCA1 methylation exhibited no association with all clinicopathological features. DNA promoter hypermethylation may be the potential mechanism accounting for BRCA1 expression silence in part of sporadic types of breast cancer. Some patients with hypermethylated BRCA1 may display favorable clinicopathological status.. BRCA1 is a susceptibility gene that has a genetic predisposition for breast cancer. BRCA1 gene mutation is closely associated with familial hereditary breast cancer, but the BRCA1 gene mutation is rarely found in sporadic breast cancer. According to previous studies, decreased expression of BRCA1 was detected in certain types of sporadic breast cancer. Aberrant methylation of DNA promoter CpG islands is one of the mechanisms by which tumor suppressor gene expression and function is lost. The aim of the present study was to investigate BRCA1 gene expression, methylation status and clinical significance in sporadic types of breast cancer. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and bisulfite sequencing PCR were respectively used to detect expression differences of BRCA1 mRNA and BRCA1 methylation in the 49 cancerous and paired non-cancerous samples from patients with breast cancer. The associations of BRCA1 expression and methylation status with the clinicopathologic characteristics were analysed. BRCA1 mRNA expression levels in the 49 breast cancer tissues were lower than those in the paired non-cancerous tissues. There was a significant statistical difference (P=0.001). BRCA1 mRNA expression was not associated with the main clinicopathologic characteristics. Frequency of the BRCA1 promoter methylation in the breast cancerous tissues was significantly higher than that in the non-cancerous tissues (P=0.007); BRCA1 gene methylation status was negatively correlated with mRNA expression (P=0.029); and BRCA1 methylation exhibited no association with all clinicopathological features. DNA promoter hypermethylation may be the potential mechanism accounting for BRCA1 expression silence in part of sporadic types of breast cancer. Some patients with hypermethylated BRCA1 may display favorable clinicopathological status.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant hypermethylation of gene promoter regions is a primary mechanism by which tumor suppressor genes become inactivated in breast cancer. Epigenetic inactivation of the protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor-type O gene (PTPRO) has been described in several types of cancer. RESULTS: We screened primary breast cancer tissues for PTPRO promoter hypermethylation and assessed potential associations with pathological features and patient outcome. We also evaluated its potential as a breast cancer biomarker. PTPRO methylation was observed in 53 of 98 (54%) breast cancer tissues but not in adjacent normal tissue. Among matched peripheral blood samples from breast cancer patients, 33 of 98 (34%) exhibited methylated PTPRO in plasma. In contrast, no methylated PTPRO was observed in normal peripheral blood from 30 healthy individuals. PTPRO methylation was positively associated with lymph node involvement (P = 0.014), poorly differentiated histology (P = 0.037), depth of invasion (P = 0.004), and HER2 amplification (P = 0.001). Multivariate analysis indicated that aberrant PTPRO methylation could serve as an independent predictor for overall survival hazard ratio (HR): 2.7; 95% CI: 1.1-6.2; P = 0.023), especially for patients with HER2-positive (hazard ratio (HR): 7.5; 95% CI: 1.8-31.3; P = 0.006), but not in ER + and PR + subpopulation. In addition, demethylation induced by 5-azacytidine led to gene reactivation in PTPRO-methylated and -silenced breast cancer cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Here, we report that tumor PTPRO methylation is a strong prognostic factor in breast cancer. Methylation of PTPRO silences its expression and plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis. The data we present here may provide insight into the development of novel therapies for breast cancer treatment. Additionally, detection of PTPRO methylation in peripheral blood of breast cancer patients may provide a noninvasive means to diagnose and monitor the disease.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant hypermethylation of gene promoter regions is a primary mechanism by which tumor suppressor genes become inactivated in breast cancer. Epigenetic inactivation of the protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor-type O gene (PTPRO) has been described in several types of cancer. RESULTS: We screened primary breast cancer tissues for PTPRO promoter hypermethylation and assessed potential associations with pathological features and patient outcome. We also evaluated its potential as a breast cancer biomarker. PTPRO methylation was observed in 53 of 98 (54%) breast cancer tissues but not in adjacent normal tissue. Among matched peripheral blood samples from breast cancer patients, 33 of 98 (34%) exhibited methylated PTPRO in plasma. In contrast, no methylated PTPRO was observed in normal peripheral blood from 30 healthy individuals. PTPRO methylation was positively associated with lymph node involvement (P = 0.014), poorly differentiated histology (P = 0.037), depth of invasion (P = 0.004), and HER2 amplification (P = 0.001). Multivariate analysis indicated that aberrant PTPRO methylation could serve as an independent predictor for overall survival hazard ratio (HR): 2.7; 95% CI: 1.1-6.2; P = 0.023), especially for patients with HER2-positive (hazard ratio (HR): 7.5; 95% CI: 1.8-31.3; P = 0.006), but not in ER + and PR + subpopulation. In addition, demethylation induced by 5-azacytidine led to gene reactivation in PTPRO-methylated and -silenced breast cancer cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: Here, we report that tumor PTPRO methylation is a strong prognostic factor in breast cancer. Methylation of PTPRO silences its expression and plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis. The data we present here may provide insight into the development of novel therapies for breast cancer treatment. Additionally, detection of PTPRO methylation in peripheral blood of breast cancer patients may provide a noninvasive means to diagnose and monitor the disease.

Aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in gene promoter regions may be an important epigenetic event in human neoplasias, including breast cancer. Dietary and genetic factors that alter DNA methylation levels in normal and tumour tissues could therefore influence both the susceptibility to this disease and tumour phenotype, respectively. In the present study of 227 breast cancers, we investigated whether common polymorphisms in 6 key genes involved in methyl group metabolism (thymidylate synthase, methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase, cystathione beta-synthase, DNA methyltransferase 3B, methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, and methionine synthase) were associated with major pathological features of this disease or the frequency of CpG island hypermethylation. No associations were observed between any of the polymorphisms and patient age, tumour size, histological grade or patient outcome. However, tumours from patients who were homozygous for the methionine synthase A2756G polymorphism showed strikingly lower estrogen and progesterone hormone receptor concentrations compared to wild-type homozygotes. Moreover, patients who were homozygous for the methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase G1958A polymorphism showed a significantly higher frequency of tumour CpG island hypermethylation compared to wild-type homozygotes. Our results show that polymorphisms in two genes involved in methyl group metabolism are associated with hormone receptor content and DNA methylation frequency in breast cancer, however these observations are unlikely to be linked.. Aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in gene promoter regions may be an important epigenetic event in human neoplasias, including breast cancer. Dietary and genetic factors that alter DNA methylation levels in normal and tumour tissues could therefore influence both the susceptibility to this disease and tumour phenotype, respectively. In the present study of 227 breast cancers, we investigated whether common polymorphisms in 6 key genes involved in methyl group metabolism (thymidylate synthase, methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase, cystathione beta-synthase, DNA methyltransferase 3B, methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, and methionine synthase) were associated with major pathological features of this disease or the frequency of CpG island hypermethylation. No associations were observed between any of the polymorphisms and patient age, tumour size, histological grade or patient outcome. However, tumours from patients who were homozygous for the methionine synthase A2756G polymorphism showed strikingly lower estrogen and progesterone hormone receptor concentrations compared to wild-type homozygotes. Moreover, patients who were homozygous for the methylene tetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase G1958A polymorphism showed a significantly higher frequency of tumour CpG island hypermethylation compared to wild-type homozygotes. Our results show that polymorphisms in two genes involved in methyl group metabolism are associated with hormone receptor content and DNA methylation frequency in breast cancer, however these observations are unlikely to be linked.

Emerging evidence indicated that changes in DNA methylation early in breast cancer (BC) development might be clinically relevant for therapeutic decisions. Through analysis of whole-genome gene expression microarray and DNA methylation microarray, we explored genes with abnormal DNA methylation in BC for early detection. Firstly, human BC tissues and adjacent non-cancerous tissues were collected from nine BC patients. Gene expression microarray sequencing was conducted for identifying differentially expressed genes and DNA methylation microarray sequencing for differentially methylated genes in BC. Differentially expressed genes and methylated genes in BC were further explored using the Cancer Genome Atlas database. The correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression was illustrated by multiple comparisons. In other 60 clinical samples, methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and reverse transcription quantitative PCR were applied for the methylation of HOXA4 and IGF1 genes in BC and adjacent non-cancerous tissues. In total, 1680 upregulated genes and 1249 downregulated genes were determined in BC. Chromosome 16 and 17 showed more differentially methylated genes, and DNA methylation level was increased in BC tissues in each gene region. Chromosome 19 showed more differentially methylated genes, and DNA methylation level was increased in BC tissues in the exoniensis 1, untranslated region-5 and transcriptional start site 200 gene regions. In other 60 clinical samples, HOXA4 and IGF1 in BC tissues presented increased DNA methylation and decreased gene expression in BC. MCF7 cells treated with RG108 showed decreased HOXA4 and IGF1 expressions. It was estimated that HOXA4 and IGF1 were identified with increased DNA methylation and decreased gene expression in BC, which may serve as biomarkers in early BC detection.. Emerging evidence indicated that changes in DNA methylation early in breast cancer (BC) development might be clinically relevant for therapeutic decisions. Through analysis of whole-genome gene expression microarray and DNA methylation microarray, we explored genes with abnormal DNA methylation in BC for early detection. Firstly, human BC tissues and adjacent non-cancerous tissues were collected from nine BC patients. Gene expression microarray sequencing was conducted for identifying differentially expressed genes and DNA methylation microarray sequencing for differentially methylated genes in BC. Differentially expressed genes and methylated genes in BC were further explored using the Cancer Genome Atlas database. The correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression was illustrated by multiple comparisons. In other 60 clinical samples, methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and reverse transcription quantitative PCR were applied for the methylation of HOXA4 and IGF1 genes in BC and adjacent non-cancerous tissues. In total, 1680 upregulated genes and 1249 downregulated genes were determined in BC. Chromosome 16 and 17 showed more differentially methylated genes, and DNA methylation level was increased in BC tissues in each gene region. Chromosome 19 showed more differentially methylated genes, and DNA methylation level was increased in BC tissues in the exoniensis 1, untranslated region-5 and transcriptional start site 200 gene regions. In other 60 clinical samples, HOXA4 and IGF1 in BC tissues presented increased DNA methylation and decreased gene expression in BC. MCF7 cells treated with RG108 showed decreased HOXA4 and IGF1 expressions. It was estimated that HOXA4 and IGF1 were identified with increased DNA methylation and decreased gene expression in BC, which may serve as biomarkers in early BC detection.

Identifying markers for breast cancer is important for both diagnosis and the design of treatment strategies. Recent studies have implicated Paired box 5 (PAX5) as a suppressor in various cancer types, where it is silenced by hypermethylation. However, determining the role of PAX5 in breast cancer requires further study, and the relationship between PAX5 methylation and breast cancer remains unclear. In this study, we found that PAX5 expression was frequently silenced or reduced by methylation in breast cancer cell lines as well as in breast cancer tissues. Restoring expression of PAX5 in breast cancer cells led to tumor suppression through inhibited proliferation and invasion, which resulted from modulation of the cell cycle and altered vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression. Most importantly, we found that PAX5 methylation status in breast cancer tissues was significantly correlated with patients' age, estrogen receptor (ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, indicating that PAX5 could serve as a marker for breast cancer diagnosis and treatment strategy design.. Identifying markers for breast cancer is important for both diagnosis and the design of treatment strategies. Recent studies have implicated Paired box 5 (PAX5) as a suppressor in various cancer types, where it is silenced by hypermethylation. However, determining the role of PAX5 in breast cancer requires further study, and the relationship between PAX5 methylation and breast cancer remains unclear. In this study, we found that PAX5 expression was frequently silenced or reduced by methylation in breast cancer cell lines as well as in breast cancer tissues. Restoring expression of PAX5 in breast cancer cells led to tumor suppression through inhibited proliferation and invasion, which resulted from modulation of the cell cycle and altered vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression. Most importantly, we found that PAX5 methylation status in breast cancer tissues was significantly correlated with patients' age, estrogen receptor (ER) status, progesterone receptor (PR) status, indicating that PAX5 could serve as a marker for breast cancer diagnosis and treatment strategy design.

MiR-27b downregulation is significantly associated with tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells. However, how it is downregulated in tamoxifen resistant (TamR) breast cancer cells and its downstream regulation were not clear. By performing MSP assay and QRT-PCR analysis with the use of 5-AZA-dC, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, we observed that TamR MCF-7 cells had significantly higher levels of methylation in the miR-27b promoter region than tamoxifen sensitive MCF-7 (TamS) cells and demethylation restored miR-27b expression. Re-expression of miR-27b sensitized TamR MCF-7 cells to tamoxifen, inhibited invasion and reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like properties. By using bioinformatics analysis and following dual luciferase and western blot analysis, this study confirmed a direct regulation of miR-27b on HMGB3 expression by binding to the 3'UTR. In addition, this study also found that silencing of HMGB3 indeed partially phenocopied the effects of miR-27b in reducing tamoxifen resistance and cell invasion and in reversing EMT-like properties. Therefore, we infer that HMGB3 is a functional target of miR-27b in modulation of tamoxifen resistance and EMT.. MiR-27b downregulation is significantly associated with tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells. However, how it is downregulated in tamoxifen resistant (TamR) breast cancer cells and its downstream regulation were not clear. By performing MSP assay and QRT-PCR analysis with the use of 5-AZA-dC, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, we observed that TamR MCF-7 cells had significantly higher levels of methylation in the miR-27b promoter region than tamoxifen sensitive MCF-7 (TamS) cells and demethylation restored miR-27b expression. Re-expression of miR-27b sensitized TamR MCF-7 cells to tamoxifen, inhibited invasion and reversed epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like properties. By using bioinformatics analysis and following dual luciferase and western blot analysis, this study confirmed a direct regulation of miR-27b on HMGB3 expression by binding to the 3'UTR. In addition, this study also found that silencing of HMGB3 indeed partially phenocopied the effects of miR-27b in reducing tamoxifen resistance and cell invasion and in reversing EMT-like properties. Therefore, we infer that HMGB3 is a functional target of miR-27b in modulation of tamoxifen resistance and EMT.

Mitofusin 2 (Mfn2) is expressed in numerous human tissues and serves a pivotal role in cell proliferation. However, Mfn2 is considered as an anti-tumor gene, and is silenced in human malignant tumors, including those of breast cancer. However, the mechanisms contributing to Mfn2 silencing and the mechanism of its anti-tumor function in breast cancer remain unclear. In the present study, hypoexpression of Mfn2, and hypermethylation of its promoter, was confirmed in human breast cancer cells and in breast cancer tissues by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and methylation specific PCR, respectively. Chemical demethylation treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine upregulated the mRNA expression level of Mfn2 in MCF-7 cells in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, overexpression of Mfn2 repressed the proliferation, migration and invasion of MCF-7 cells, mediated by inhibition of the Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 signaling pathway. However, overexpression of Mfn2 with deletion of the p21(Ras) motif (Mfn2(DeltaRas)) and protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation site (Mfn2(DeltaPKA)) partially reduced the anti-tumor function of Mfn2, and inhibited the Ras-ERK1/2 signaling pathway. Taken together, the present study confirmed the anti-tumor effects of Mfn2 in human breast cancer and clarified that the mechanism of its anti-tumor functions includes promoter DNA methylation, the P21(Ras) binding site and PKA phosphorylation.. Mitofusin 2 (Mfn2) is expressed in numerous human tissues and serves a pivotal role in cell proliferation. However, Mfn2 is considered as an anti-tumor gene, and is silenced in human malignant tumors, including those of breast cancer. However, the mechanisms contributing to Mfn2 silencing and the mechanism of its anti-tumor function in breast cancer remain unclear. In the present study, hypoexpression of Mfn2, and hypermethylation of its promoter, was confirmed in human breast cancer cells and in breast cancer tissues by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and methylation specific PCR, respectively. Chemical demethylation treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine upregulated the mRNA expression level of Mfn2 in MCF-7 cells in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, overexpression of Mfn2 repressed the proliferation, migration and invasion of MCF-7 cells, mediated by inhibition of the Ras-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 signaling pathway. However, overexpression of Mfn2 with deletion of the p21(Ras) motif (Mfn2(DeltaRas)) and protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation site (Mfn2(DeltaPKA)) partially reduced the anti-tumor function of Mfn2, and inhibited the Ras-ERK1/2 signaling pathway. Taken together, the present study confirmed the anti-tumor effects of Mfn2 in human breast cancer and clarified that the mechanism of its anti-tumor functions includes promoter DNA methylation, the P21(Ras) binding site and PKA phosphorylation.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation regulates gene expression, through the inhibition/activation of gene transcription of methylated/unmethylated genes. Hence, DNA methylation profiling can capture pivotal features of gene expression in cancer tissues from patients at the time of diagnosis. In this work, we analyzed a breast cancer case series, to identify DNA methylation determinants of metastatic versus non-metastatic tumors. METHODS: CpG-island methylation was evaluated on a 56-gene cancer-specific biomarker microarray in metastatic versus non-metastatic breast cancers in a multi-institutional case series of 123 breast cancer patients. Global statistical modeling and unsupervised hierarchical clustering were applied to identify a multi-gene binary classifier with high sensitivity and specificity. Network analysis was utilized to quantify the connectivity of the identified genes. RESULTS: Seven genes (BRCA1, DAPK1, MSH2, CDKN2A, PGR, PRKCDBP, RANKL) were found informative for prognosis of metastatic diffusion and were used to calculate classifier accuracy versus the entire data-set. Individual-gene performances showed sensitivities of 63-79 %, 53-84 % specificities, positive predictive values of 59-83 % and negative predictive values of 63-80 %. When modelled together, these seven genes reached a sensitivity of 93 %, 100 % specificity, a positive predictive value of 100 % and a negative predictive value of 93 %, with high statistical power. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering independently confirmed these findings, in close agreement with the accuracy measurements. Network analyses indicated tight interrelationship between the identified genes, suggesting this to be a functionally-coordinated module, linked to breast cancer progression. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identify CpG-island methylation profiles with deep impact on clinical outcome, paving the way for use as novel prognostic assays in clinical settings.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation regulates gene expression, through the inhibition/activation of gene transcription of methylated/unmethylated genes. Hence, DNA methylation profiling can capture pivotal features of gene expression in cancer tissues from patients at the time of diagnosis. In this work, we analyzed a breast cancer case series, to identify DNA methylation determinants of metastatic versus non-metastatic tumors. METHODS: CpG-island methylation was evaluated on a 56-gene cancer-specific biomarker microarray in metastatic versus non-metastatic breast cancers in a multi-institutional case series of 123 breast cancer patients. Global statistical modeling and unsupervised hierarchical clustering were applied to identify a multi-gene binary classifier with high sensitivity and specificity. Network analysis was utilized to quantify the connectivity of the identified genes. RESULTS: Seven genes (BRCA1, DAPK1, MSH2, CDKN2A, PGR, PRKCDBP, RANKL) were found informative for prognosis of metastatic diffusion and were used to calculate classifier accuracy versus the entire data-set. Individual-gene performances showed sensitivities of 63-79 %, 53-84 % specificities, positive predictive values of 59-83 % and negative predictive values of 63-80 %. When modelled together, these seven genes reached a sensitivity of 93 %, 100 % specificity, a positive predictive value of 100 % and a negative predictive value of 93 %, with high statistical power. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering independently confirmed these findings, in close agreement with the accuracy measurements. Network analyses indicated tight interrelationship between the identified genes, suggesting this to be a functionally-coordinated module, linked to breast cancer progression. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identify CpG-island methylation profiles with deep impact on clinical outcome, paving the way for use as novel prognostic assays in clinical settings.

The novel tumor suppressor RASSF1A is frequently inactivated during human tumorigenesis by promoter methylation. In this study, we detected the RASSF1A promoter methylation by methylated-specific PCR and investigated RASSF1A gene expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical staining in 36 cases of breast cancer and their adjacent normal tissues in Chinese women. The promoter methylation of the RASSF1A gene was found to be a frequent event in the breast cancers (61.1%). RASSF1A methylation was not found in the matched adjacent normal tissues. The loss frequency of RASSF1A mRNA was 33.3% and that of the RASSF1A protein was 44.4% in breast cancers. RASSF1A mRNA and protein were all expressed in adjacent normal tissues. The mRNA and protein expression level of RASSF1A was significantly lower in breast cancer than in adjacent normal tissue. However, the promoter methylation of the RASSF1A gene in breast cancers were not correlated with clinical parameters, such as ages, histological types, TNM stages and lymph node metastases. Thus, the promoter methylation of RASSF1A was one reason for the low level of RASSF1A mRNA and protein expression and was a frequent event in primary sporadic breast tumorigenesis in Chinese women.. The novel tumor suppressor RASSF1A is frequently inactivated during human tumorigenesis by promoter methylation. In this study, we detected the RASSF1A promoter methylation by methylated-specific PCR and investigated RASSF1A gene expression by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical staining in 36 cases of breast cancer and their adjacent normal tissues in Chinese women. The promoter methylation of the RASSF1A gene was found to be a frequent event in the breast cancers (61.1%). RASSF1A methylation was not found in the matched adjacent normal tissues. The loss frequency of RASSF1A mRNA was 33.3% and that of the RASSF1A protein was 44.4% in breast cancers. RASSF1A mRNA and protein were all expressed in adjacent normal tissues. The mRNA and protein expression level of RASSF1A was significantly lower in breast cancer than in adjacent normal tissue. However, the promoter methylation of the RASSF1A gene in breast cancers were not correlated with clinical parameters, such as ages, histological types, TNM stages and lymph node metastases. Thus, the promoter methylation of RASSF1A was one reason for the low level of RASSF1A mRNA and protein expression and was a frequent event in primary sporadic breast tumorigenesis in Chinese women.

Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has been considered as a potential biomarker for non-invasive cancer detection. To evaluate the methylation levels of six candidate genes (EGFR, GREM1, PDGFRB, PPM1E, SOX17, and WRN) in plasma cfDNA as biomarkers for breast cancer early detection, quantitative analysis of the promoter methylation of these genes from 86 breast cancer patients and 67 healthy controls was performed by using microfluidic-PCR-based target enrichment and next-generation bisulfite sequencing technology. The predictive performance of different logistic models based on methylation status of candidate genes was investigated by means of the area under the ROC curve (AUC) and odds ratio (OR) analysis. Results revealed that EGFR, PPM1E, and 8 gene-specific CpG sites showed significantly hypermethylation in cancer patients' plasma and significantly associated with breast cancer (OR ranging from 2.51 to 9.88). The AUC values for these biomarkers were ranging from 0.66 to 0.75. Combinations of multiple hypermethylated genes or CpG sites substantially improved the predictive performance for breast cancer detection. Our study demonstrated the feasibility of quantitative measurement of candidate gene methylation in cfDNA by using microfluidic-PCR-based target enrichment and bisulfite next-generation sequencing, which is worthy of further validation and potentially benefits a broad range of applications in clinical oncology practice. Quantitative analysis of methylation pattern of plasma cfDNA by next-generation sequencing might be a valuable non-invasive tool for early detection of breast cancer.. Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has been considered as a potential biomarker for non-invasive cancer detection. To evaluate the methylation levels of six candidate genes (EGFR, GREM1, PDGFRB, PPM1E, SOX17, and WRN) in plasma cfDNA as biomarkers for breast cancer early detection, quantitative analysis of the promoter methylation of these genes from 86 breast cancer patients and 67 healthy controls was performed by using microfluidic-PCR-based target enrichment and next-generation bisulfite sequencing technology. The predictive performance of different logistic models based on methylation status of candidate genes was investigated by means of the area under the ROC curve (AUC) and odds ratio (OR) analysis. Results revealed that EGFR, PPM1E, and 8 gene-specific CpG sites showed significantly hypermethylation in cancer patients' plasma and significantly associated with breast cancer (OR ranging from 2.51 to 9.88). The AUC values for these biomarkers were ranging from 0.66 to 0.75. Combinations of multiple hypermethylated genes or CpG sites substantially improved the predictive performance for breast cancer detection. Our study demonstrated the feasibility of quantitative measurement of candidate gene methylation in cfDNA by using microfluidic-PCR-based target enrichment and bisulfite next-generation sequencing, which is worthy of further validation and potentially benefits a broad range of applications in clinical oncology practice. Quantitative analysis of methylation pattern of plasma cfDNA by next-generation sequencing might be a valuable non-invasive tool for early detection of breast cancer.

Gene-specific methylation alterations in breast cancer have been suggested to occur early in tumorigenesis and have the potential to be used for early detection and prevention. The continuous increase in worldwide breast cancer incidences emphasizes the urgent need for identification of methylation biomarkers for early cancer detection and patient stratification. Using microfluidic PCR-based target enrichment and next-generation bisulfite sequencing technology, we analyzed methylation status of 48 candidate genes in paired tumor and normal tissues from 180 Chinese breast cancer patients. Analysis of the sequencing results showed 37 genes differentially methylated between tumor and matched normal tissues. Breast cancer samples with different clinicopathologic characteristics demonstrated distinct profiles of gene methylation. The methylation levels were significantly different between breast cancer subtypes, with basal-like and luminal B tumors having the lowest and the highest methylation levels, respectively. Six genes (ACADL, ADAMTSL1, CAV1, NPY, PTGS2, and RUNX3) showed significant differential methylation among the 4 breast cancer subtypes and also between the ER +/ER- tumors. Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, we identified a panel of 13 hypermethylated genes as candidate biomarkers that performed a high level of efficiency for cancer prediction. These 13 genes included CST6, DBC1, EGFR, GREM1, GSTP1, IGFBP3, PDGFRB, PPM1E, SFRP1, SFRP2, SOX17, TNFRSF10D, and WRN. Our results provide evidence that well-defined DNA methylation profiles enable breast cancer prediction and patient stratification. The novel gene panel might be a valuable biomarker for early detection of breast cancer.. Gene-specific methylation alterations in breast cancer have been suggested to occur early in tumorigenesis and have the potential to be used for early detection and prevention. The continuous increase in worldwide breast cancer incidences emphasizes the urgent need for identification of methylation biomarkers for early cancer detection and patient stratification. Using microfluidic PCR-based target enrichment and next-generation bisulfite sequencing technology, we analyzed methylation status of 48 candidate genes in paired tumor and normal tissues from 180 Chinese breast cancer patients. Analysis of the sequencing results showed 37 genes differentially methylated between tumor and matched normal tissues. Breast cancer samples with different clinicopathologic characteristics demonstrated distinct profiles of gene methylation. The methylation levels were significantly different between breast cancer subtypes, with basal-like and luminal B tumors having the lowest and the highest methylation levels, respectively. Six genes (ACADL, ADAMTSL1, CAV1, NPY, PTGS2, and RUNX3) showed significant differential methylation among the 4 breast cancer subtypes and also between the ER +/ER- tumors. Using unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, we identified a panel of 13 hypermethylated genes as candidate biomarkers that performed a high level of efficiency for cancer prediction. These 13 genes included CST6, DBC1, EGFR, GREM1, GSTP1, IGFBP3, PDGFRB, PPM1E, SFRP1, SFRP2, SOX17, TNFRSF10D, and WRN. Our results provide evidence that well-defined DNA methylation profiles enable breast cancer prediction and patient stratification. The novel gene panel might be a valuable biomarker for early detection of breast cancer.

PURPOSE: Gene-specific methylation and expression have shown biological and clinical importance for breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Integrated analysis of gene methylation and gene expression may identify genes associated with biology mechanism and clinical outcome of breast cancer and aid in clinical management. METHODS: Using high-throughput microfluidic quantitative PCR, we analyzed the expression profiles of 48 candidate genes in 96 Chinese breast cancer patients and investigated their correlation with gene methylation and associations with breast cancer clinical parameters. RESULTS: Breast cancer-specific gene expression alternation was found in 25 genes with significant expression difference between paired tumor and normal tissues. A total of 9 genes (CCND2, EGFR, GSTP1, PGR, PTGS2, RECK, SOX17, TNFRSF10D, and WIF1) showed significant negative correlation between methylation and gene expression, which were validated in the TCGA database. Total 23 genes (ACADL, APC, BRCA2, CADM1, CAV1, CCND2, CST6, EGFR, ESR2, GSTP1, ICAM5, NPY, PGR, PTGS2, RECK, RUNX3, SFRP1, SOX17, SYK, TGFBR2, TNFRSF10D, WIF1, and WRN) annotated with potential TFBSs in the promoter regions showed negative correlation between methylation and expression. In logistics regression analysis, 31 of the 48 genes showed improved performance in disease prediction with combination of methylation and expression coefficient. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated the complex correlation and the possible regulatory mechanisms between DNA methylation and gene expression. Integration analysis of methylation and expression of candidate genes could improve performance in breast cancer prediction. These findings would contribute to molecular characterization and identification of biomarkers for potential clinical applications.. PURPOSE: Gene-specific methylation and expression have shown biological and clinical importance for breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Integrated analysis of gene methylation and gene expression may identify genes associated with biology mechanism and clinical outcome of breast cancer and aid in clinical management. METHODS: Using high-throughput microfluidic quantitative PCR, we analyzed the expression profiles of 48 candidate genes in 96 Chinese breast cancer patients and investigated their correlation with gene methylation and associations with breast cancer clinical parameters. RESULTS: Breast cancer-specific gene expression alternation was found in 25 genes with significant expression difference between paired tumor and normal tissues. A total of 9 genes (CCND2, EGFR, GSTP1, PGR, PTGS2, RECK, SOX17, TNFRSF10D, and WIF1) showed significant negative correlation between methylation and gene expression, which were validated in the TCGA database. Total 23 genes (ACADL, APC, BRCA2, CADM1, CAV1, CCND2, CST6, EGFR, ESR2, GSTP1, ICAM5, NPY, PGR, PTGS2, RECK, RUNX3, SFRP1, SOX17, SYK, TGFBR2, TNFRSF10D, WIF1, and WRN) annotated with potential TFBSs in the promoter regions showed negative correlation between methylation and expression. In logistics regression analysis, 31 of the 48 genes showed improved performance in disease prediction with combination of methylation and expression coefficient. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated the complex correlation and the possible regulatory mechanisms between DNA methylation and gene expression. Integration analysis of methylation and expression of candidate genes could improve performance in breast cancer prediction. These findings would contribute to molecular characterization and identification of biomarkers for potential clinical applications.

Methylation of components involved in one-carbon metabolism is extremely important in cancer; comprehensive studies on methylation are essential and may provide us with a better understanding of tumorigenesis, and lead to the discovery of potential biomarkers. Here, we present an improved methodology for methylated metabolite profiling and its relative quantification in breast cancer cell lines by isotope dilution mass spectrometry based on (13)CD3-methionine metabolic labeling using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-HRMS/MS). First, all the methylated metabolites related to methionine were first screened and profiled by introducing (13)CD3-methionine as the only medium into breast cancer cell growth cultures for both cellular polar metabolites and lipids. In total, we successfully found 20 labeled methylated metabolites and most of them were identified, some of which have not been reported before. We also developed a relative quantification method for all identified methylated metabolites based on isotope dilution mass spectrometry assays. Finally, the developed method was used for different breast cancer cells and mammary epithelial cells. Most methylated metabolites were disrupted in cancer cells. 1-Methyl-nicotinamide was decreased significantly, while trimethylglycine-glutamic acid-lysine and trimethyl-lysine were increased more than five times. This method offers a new insight into the methylation process, with several key pathways and important new metabolites being identified. Further investigation with biological assays should help to reveal the overall methylation metabolic network.. Methylation of components involved in one-carbon metabolism is extremely important in cancer; comprehensive studies on methylation are essential and may provide us with a better understanding of tumorigenesis, and lead to the discovery of potential biomarkers. Here, we present an improved methodology for methylated metabolite profiling and its relative quantification in breast cancer cell lines by isotope dilution mass spectrometry based on (13)CD3-methionine metabolic labeling using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-HRMS/MS). First, all the methylated metabolites related to methionine were first screened and profiled by introducing (13)CD3-methionine as the only medium into breast cancer cell growth cultures for both cellular polar metabolites and lipids. In total, we successfully found 20 labeled methylated metabolites and most of them were identified, some of which have not been reported before. We also developed a relative quantification method for all identified methylated metabolites based on isotope dilution mass spectrometry assays. Finally, the developed method was used for different breast cancer cells and mammary epithelial cells. Most methylated metabolites were disrupted in cancer cells. 1-Methyl-nicotinamide was decreased significantly, while trimethylglycine-glutamic acid-lysine and trimethyl-lysine were increased more than five times. This method offers a new insight into the methylation process, with several key pathways and important new metabolites being identified. Further investigation with biological assays should help to reveal the overall methylation metabolic network.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor N(1)-(ferrocenyl)-N(8)-hydroxyoctanediamide (JAHA) down-regulates extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and its activated form in triple-negative MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells after 18 h and up to 30 h of treatment, and to a lesser extent AKT and phospho-AKT after 30 h and up to 48 h of treatment. Also, DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), 3b and, to a lesser extent, 3a, downstream ERK targets, were down-regulated already at 18 h with an increase up to 48 h of exposure. Methylation-sensitive restriction arbitrarily-primed (MeSAP) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis confirmed the ability of JAHA to induce genome-wide DNA hypomethylation at 48 h of exposure. Collective data suggest that JAHA, by down-regulating phospho-ERK, impairs DNMT1 and 3b expression and ultimately DNA methylation extent, which may be related to its cytotoxic effect on this cancer cytotype.. The histone deacetylase inhibitor N(1)-(ferrocenyl)-N(8)-hydroxyoctanediamide (JAHA) down-regulates extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and its activated form in triple-negative MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells after 18 h and up to 30 h of treatment, and to a lesser extent AKT and phospho-AKT after 30 h and up to 48 h of treatment. Also, DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), 3b and, to a lesser extent, 3a, downstream ERK targets, were down-regulated already at 18 h with an increase up to 48 h of exposure. Methylation-sensitive restriction arbitrarily-primed (MeSAP) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis confirmed the ability of JAHA to induce genome-wide DNA hypomethylation at 48 h of exposure. Collective data suggest that JAHA, by down-regulating phospho-ERK, impairs DNMT1 and 3b expression and ultimately DNA methylation extent, which may be related to its cytotoxic effect on this cancer cytotype.

Abnormal DNA methylation is a feature of most types of cancer, which is reflected in cell-free circulating DNA in plasma. It is, however, unknown whether surgical removal of the tumor and subsequent therapy induces changes in plasma DNA methylation, which can be used to monitor treatment. In this pilot study, methylation in cell-free plasma DNA of 20 breast cancer patients was determined by the previously developed MethDet-56 technique. Samples at three time points were analyzed-before surgery (baseline), after surgery (to evaluate the effects of resection) and after surgery on tamoxifen therapy (to determine the effects of treatment). Methylation patterns of healthy controls were used as a reference for all comparisons. Seven promoters were differentially methylated (p < 0.05) in at least one comparison; three changed after surgery; another one changed after beginning of tamoxifen treatment; and four were differentially methylated in baseline versus combined treatment samples. Increased methylation of PR PROX, MDGI, PAX 5 and RARbeta2 at baseline (presurgery) diminished toward the healthy controls with the lowest methylation in the combined treatment group. Surgery alone decreased methylation in PAX 5 and RARbeta2, whereas tamoxifen treatment changed methylation only in the B promoter of ESR1. Methylation patterns in cell-free plasma DNA change after surgery and tamoxifen treatment, most significantly-after combined treatment. The baseline (presurgery) patterns become similar to those of healthy controls, suggesting that methylation patterns in cell-free plasma DNA may be used to monitor treatment.. Abnormal DNA methylation is a feature of most types of cancer, which is reflected in cell-free circulating DNA in plasma. It is, however, unknown whether surgical removal of the tumor and subsequent therapy induces changes in plasma DNA methylation, which can be used to monitor treatment. In this pilot study, methylation in cell-free plasma DNA of 20 breast cancer patients was determined by the previously developed MethDet-56 technique. Samples at three time points were analyzed-before surgery (baseline), after surgery (to evaluate the effects of resection) and after surgery on tamoxifen therapy (to determine the effects of treatment). Methylation patterns of healthy controls were used as a reference for all comparisons. Seven promoters were differentially methylated (p < 0.05) in at least one comparison; three changed after surgery; another one changed after beginning of tamoxifen treatment; and four were differentially methylated in baseline versus combined treatment samples. Increased methylation of PR PROX, MDGI, PAX 5 and RARbeta2 at baseline (presurgery) diminished toward the healthy controls with the lowest methylation in the combined treatment group. Surgery alone decreased methylation in PAX 5 and RARbeta2, whereas tamoxifen treatment changed methylation only in the B promoter of ESR1. Methylation patterns in cell-free plasma DNA change after surgery and tamoxifen treatment, most significantly-after combined treatment. The baseline (presurgery) patterns become similar to those of healthy controls, suggesting that methylation patterns in cell-free plasma DNA may be used to monitor treatment.

ANKRD11 is a putative tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer, which has been shown in our laboratory to be a co-activator of p53. Our data suggest that down-regulation of ANKRD11 is associated with breast tumourigenesis. Breast cancer cell lines treated with DNA demethylating agents resulted in up-regulation of ANKRD11 expression suggesting that promoter DNA methylation may be responsible for its down-regulation. The transcriptional activity of a CpG-rich region 2kb upstream of the transcription initiation site of ANKRD11 was investigated using dual-luciferase reporter assays. The constructs carrying -661 to -571 bp promoter sequence showed significant transcriptional activity. Using the SEQUENOM Epityper Platform, the region between -770 and +399 bp was analysed in 25 breast tumours, four normal breast tissues and five normal blood samples. The region between -770 and -323 bp was shown to be frequently methylated in breast tumours. The methylation patterns of all analysed CpGs in this region were identical in the normal and tumour samples, except for a 19 bp region containing three CpG sites. These sites had significantly higher levels of methylation in tumours (40%) compared to normal samples (6%). Our findings support the role of ANKRD11 as a tumour suppressor gene and suggest that aberrant DNA methylation of three CpGs in a 19 bp region within the ANKRD11 promoter may be responsible for its down-regulation in breast cancer.. ANKRD11 is a putative tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer, which has been shown in our laboratory to be a co-activator of p53. Our data suggest that down-regulation of ANKRD11 is associated with breast tumourigenesis. Breast cancer cell lines treated with DNA demethylating agents resulted in up-regulation of ANKRD11 expression suggesting that promoter DNA methylation may be responsible for its down-regulation. The transcriptional activity of a CpG-rich region 2kb upstream of the transcription initiation site of ANKRD11 was investigated using dual-luciferase reporter assays. The constructs carrying -661 to -571 bp promoter sequence showed significant transcriptional activity. Using the SEQUENOM Epityper Platform, the region between -770 and +399 bp was analysed in 25 breast tumours, four normal breast tissues and five normal blood samples. The region between -770 and -323 bp was shown to be frequently methylated in breast tumours. The methylation patterns of all analysed CpGs in this region were identical in the normal and tumour samples, except for a 19 bp region containing three CpG sites. These sites had significantly higher levels of methylation in tumours (40%) compared to normal samples (6%). Our findings support the role of ANKRD11 as a tumour suppressor gene and suggest that aberrant DNA methylation of three CpGs in a 19 bp region within the ANKRD11 promoter may be responsible for its down-regulation in breast cancer.

The aim of this study was to explore the associations of urinary selenium and polymorphisms in methylation related genes with breast cancer risk and the interactions on the risk. The present study involved in 240 female patients with incident breast cancer and 246 age-matched controls in two affiliated hospitals of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou, China, from October 2009 to July 2010. DNMT1 rs2228611, MTHFR rs1801133, and MTR rs1805087 were genotyped using a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry platform. Urinary concentration of selenium was measured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Women with urinary selenium in the second tertile had a significant reduced breast cancer risk compared to those with urinary selenium in the lowest tertile [OR (95%CI): 0.50 (0.30, 0.81)]. DNMT1 rs2228611, MTHFR rs1801133, and MTR rs1805087 were not associated with breast cancer risk. Women with the third tertile of urinary selenium had a significant reduced breast cancer risk compared to those with the lowest tertile among women only with CC genotype [OR (95%CI): 0.55 (0.30, 1.00)] but not CT/TT genotypes [OR (95%CI): 1.58 (0.73, 3.42)] of MTHFR rs1801133 (P for interaction=0.044). Our results suggested that selenium was associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer and this beneficial effect was limited to women with CC genotype of MTHFR rs1801133.. The aim of this study was to explore the associations of urinary selenium and polymorphisms in methylation related genes with breast cancer risk and the interactions on the risk. The present study involved in 240 female patients with incident breast cancer and 246 age-matched controls in two affiliated hospitals of Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou, China, from October 2009 to July 2010. DNMT1 rs2228611, MTHFR rs1801133, and MTR rs1805087 were genotyped using a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry platform. Urinary concentration of selenium was measured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Women with urinary selenium in the second tertile had a significant reduced breast cancer risk compared to those with urinary selenium in the lowest tertile [OR (95%CI): 0.50 (0.30, 0.81)]. DNMT1 rs2228611, MTHFR rs1801133, and MTR rs1805087 were not associated with breast cancer risk. Women with the third tertile of urinary selenium had a significant reduced breast cancer risk compared to those with the lowest tertile among women only with CC genotype [OR (95%CI): 0.55 (0.30, 1.00)] but not CT/TT genotypes [OR (95%CI): 1.58 (0.73, 3.42)] of MTHFR rs1801133 (P for interaction=0.044). Our results suggested that selenium was associated with a decreased risk of breast cancer and this beneficial effect was limited to women with CC genotype of MTHFR rs1801133.

INTRODUCTION: Development of resistance to tamoxifen is an important clinical issue in the treatment of breast cancer. Tamoxifen resistance may be the result of acquisition of epigenetic regulation within breast cancer cells, such as DNA methylation, resulting in changed mRNA expression of genes pivotal for estrogen-dependent growth. Alternatively, tamoxifen resistance may be due to selection of pre-existing resistant cells, or a combination of the two mechanisms. METHODS: To evaluate the contribution of these possible tamoxifen resistance mechanisms, we applied modified DNA methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MMSDK) and digital gene expression (DGE) in combination with massive parallel sequencing to analyze a well-established tamoxifen-resistant cell line model (TAM(R)), consisting of 4 resistant and one parental cell line. Another tamoxifen-resistant cell line model system (LCC1/LCC2) was used to validate the DNA methylation and gene expression results. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in global gene expression and DNA methylation profiles between the parental tamoxifen-sensitive cell line and the 4 tamoxifen-resistant TAM(R) sublines. The 4 TAM(R) cell lines exhibited higher methylation levels as well as an inverse relationship between gene expression and DNA methylation in the promoter regions. A panel of genes, including NRIP1, HECA and FIS1, exhibited lower gene expression in resistant vs. parental cells and concurrent increased promoter CGI methylation in resistant vs. parental cell lines. A major part of the methylation, gene expression, and pathway alterations observed in the TAM(R) model were also present in the LCC1/LCC2 cell line model. More importantly, high expression of SOX2 and alterations of other SOX and E2F gene family members, as well as RB-related pocket protein genes in TAMR highlighted stem cell-associated pathways as being central in the resistant cells and imply that cancer-initiating cells/cancer stem-like cells may be involved in tamoxifen resistance in this model. CONCLUSION: Our data highlight the likelihood that resistant cells emerge from cancer-initiating cells/cancer stem-like cells and imply that these cells may gain further advantage in growth via epigenetic mechanisms. Illuminating the expression and DNA methylation features of putative cancer-initiating cells/cancer stem cells may suggest novel strategies to overcome tamoxifen resistance.. INTRODUCTION: Development of resistance to tamoxifen is an important clinical issue in the treatment of breast cancer. Tamoxifen resistance may be the result of acquisition of epigenetic regulation within breast cancer cells, such as DNA methylation, resulting in changed mRNA expression of genes pivotal for estrogen-dependent growth. Alternatively, tamoxifen resistance may be due to selection of pre-existing resistant cells, or a combination of the two mechanisms. METHODS: To evaluate the contribution of these possible tamoxifen resistance mechanisms, we applied modified DNA methylation-specific digital karyotyping (MMSDK) and digital gene expression (DGE) in combination with massive parallel sequencing to analyze a well-established tamoxifen-resistant cell line model (TAM(R)), consisting of 4 resistant and one parental cell line. Another tamoxifen-resistant cell line model system (LCC1/LCC2) was used to validate the DNA methylation and gene expression results. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in global gene expression and DNA methylation profiles between the parental tamoxifen-sensitive cell line and the 4 tamoxifen-resistant TAM(R) sublines. The 4 TAM(R) cell lines exhibited higher methylation levels as well as an inverse relationship between gene expression and DNA methylation in the promoter regions. A panel of genes, including NRIP1, HECA and FIS1, exhibited lower gene expression in resistant vs. parental cells and concurrent increased promoter CGI methylation in resistant vs. parental cell lines. A major part of the methylation, gene expression, and pathway alterations observed in the TAM(R) model were also present in the LCC1/LCC2 cell line model. More importantly, high expression of SOX2 and alterations of other SOX and E2F gene family members, as well as RB-related pocket protein genes in TAMR highlighted stem cell-associated pathways as being central in the resistant cells and imply that cancer-initiating cells/cancer stem-like cells may be involved in tamoxifen resistance in this model. CONCLUSION: Our data highlight the likelihood that resistant cells emerge from cancer-initiating cells/cancer stem-like cells and imply that these cells may gain further advantage in growth via epigenetic mechanisms. Illuminating the expression and DNA methylation features of putative cancer-initiating cells/cancer stem cells may suggest novel strategies to overcome tamoxifen resistance.

Solute carrier family 25A member 43 (SLC25A43) gene is a putative tumor suppressor gene that undergoes loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive breast cancer. Also, knockdown of SLC25A43 in cell lines influences cell turnover and metabolism. Absence of mutations in this gene in breast cancers prompted us to study methylation as an alternate mechanism for gene inactivation of this X encoded gene. Quantification of CpG site methylation using pyrosequencing was performed upstream of the SLC25A43 gene and at its 5' end in a cohort of breast tumor tissues (n = 80, HER2 positive or negative) with different SLC25A43 gene deletion status. Compared with control tissue, cancer tissues had lower levels of methylation at the 5' and 3' shores of the gene. Cancer tissues with no deletion in the SLC25A43 gene (Del (-)) had higher methylation in the CpG island (CGI) of the gene than cancers carrying the deletion (Del (+)). Methylation in the CGI of the SLC25A43 gene was negatively correlated with age at diagnosis. In HER2 positive breast cancer, ER negativity and lymph node positivity was associated with higher methylation in the CGI and in the adjacent shores of this gene. Our results suggest that methylation in the CGI of the SLC25A43 gene could be an alternate mechanism of gene silencing in the absence of LOH. Also, associations between site-specific methylation and clinicopathological parameters suggest that epigenetic changes in SLC25A43 gene could be of importance in breast carcinogenesis.. Solute carrier family 25A member 43 (SLC25A43) gene is a putative tumor suppressor gene that undergoes loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive breast cancer. Also, knockdown of SLC25A43 in cell lines influences cell turnover and metabolism. Absence of mutations in this gene in breast cancers prompted us to study methylation as an alternate mechanism for gene inactivation of this X encoded gene. Quantification of CpG site methylation using pyrosequencing was performed upstream of the SLC25A43 gene and at its 5' end in a cohort of breast tumor tissues (n = 80, HER2 positive or negative) with different SLC25A43 gene deletion status. Compared with control tissue, cancer tissues had lower levels of methylation at the 5' and 3' shores of the gene. Cancer tissues with no deletion in the SLC25A43 gene (Del (-)) had higher methylation in the CpG island (CGI) of the gene than cancers carrying the deletion (Del (+)). Methylation in the CGI of the SLC25A43 gene was negatively correlated with age at diagnosis. In HER2 positive breast cancer, ER negativity and lymph node positivity was associated with higher methylation in the CGI and in the adjacent shores of this gene. Our results suggest that methylation in the CGI of the SLC25A43 gene could be an alternate mechanism of gene silencing in the absence of LOH. Also, associations between site-specific methylation and clinicopathological parameters suggest that epigenetic changes in SLC25A43 gene could be of importance in breast carcinogenesis.

In order to obtain a comprehensive DNA methylation signature of HER2-positive breast cancer (HER2+ breast cancer), we performed a genome-wide methylation analysis on 17 HER2+ breast cancer and compared with ten normal breast tissue samples using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (450K). In HER2+ breast cancer, we found altered DNA methylation in genes involved in multicellular development, differentiation and transcription. Within these genes, we observed an overrepresentation of homeobox family genes, including several genes that have not been previously reported in relation to cancer (DBX1, NKX2-6, SIX6). Other affected genes included several belonging to the PI3K and Wnt signaling pathways. Notably, HER2, AKT3, HK1, and PFKP, genes for which altered methylation has not been previously reported, were also identified in this analysis. In total, we report 69 candidate biomarker genes with maximum differential methylation in HER2+ breast cancer. External validation of gene expression in a selected group of these genes (n = 13) revealed lowered mean gene expression in HER2+ breast cancer. We analyzed DNA methylation in six top candidate genes (AKR1B1, INA, FOXC2, NEUROD1, CDKL2, IRF4) using EpiTect Methyl II Custom PCR Array and confirmed the 450K array findings. Future clinical studies focusing on these genes, as well as on homeobox-containing genes and HER2, AKT3, HK1, and PFKP, are warranted which could provide further insights into the biology of HER2+ breast cancer.. In order to obtain a comprehensive DNA methylation signature of HER2-positive breast cancer (HER2+ breast cancer), we performed a genome-wide methylation analysis on 17 HER2+ breast cancer and compared with ten normal breast tissue samples using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (450K). In HER2+ breast cancer, we found altered DNA methylation in genes involved in multicellular development, differentiation and transcription. Within these genes, we observed an overrepresentation of homeobox family genes, including several genes that have not been previously reported in relation to cancer (DBX1, NKX2-6, SIX6). Other affected genes included several belonging to the PI3K and Wnt signaling pathways. Notably, HER2, AKT3, HK1, and PFKP, genes for which altered methylation has not been previously reported, were also identified in this analysis. In total, we report 69 candidate biomarker genes with maximum differential methylation in HER2+ breast cancer. External validation of gene expression in a selected group of these genes (n = 13) revealed lowered mean gene expression in HER2+ breast cancer. We analyzed DNA methylation in six top candidate genes (AKR1B1, INA, FOXC2, NEUROD1, CDKL2, IRF4) using EpiTect Methyl II Custom PCR Array and confirmed the 450K array findings. Future clinical studies focusing on these genes, as well as on homeobox-containing genes and HER2, AKT3, HK1, and PFKP, are warranted which could provide further insights into the biology of HER2+ breast cancer.

The thyroid hormone receptors (TR) have three major isoforms, TRalpha1, TRalpha2, and TRbeta1; these are ligand-dependent nuclear transcription factors. THRB, the gene encoding TRbeta1, is considered a potential cancer suppressor. The mechanism of its inactivation is not yet clear. Aberrant silencing of THRB in breast cancer tissue and plasma by promoter hypermethylation was investigated in the present study. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to examine THRB mRNA expression in the breast cancer tissues. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) combined with nested PCR was used to determine the methylation status of the THRB gene promoter region in 40 cancer tissue and 40 plasma samples from breast cancer patients. Methylation status of MSP product in plasma was also evaluated by direct sequencing. The expression of THRB mRNA in breast cancer tissues was lower than that in the normal tissues; hypermethylation was found in 32 of 40 breast cancer tissues (80%) and in 28 of 40 plasma samples (70%). Loss of THRB gene expression was associated with the CpG island hypermethylation of promoter regions. THRB gene CpG island methylation was not related to clinical pathologic parameters. Sequencing results were identical to agarose gel electrophoresis results. The present results indicate that hypermethylation of THRB as an alternative gene silencing mechanism is highly prevalent in breast cancer. Methylated tumor-specific DNA may serve as a plasma biomarker for prognosis in patients with breast cancer.. The thyroid hormone receptors (TR) have three major isoforms, TRalpha1, TRalpha2, and TRbeta1; these are ligand-dependent nuclear transcription factors. THRB, the gene encoding TRbeta1, is considered a potential cancer suppressor. The mechanism of its inactivation is not yet clear. Aberrant silencing of THRB in breast cancer tissue and plasma by promoter hypermethylation was investigated in the present study. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to examine THRB mRNA expression in the breast cancer tissues. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) combined with nested PCR was used to determine the methylation status of the THRB gene promoter region in 40 cancer tissue and 40 plasma samples from breast cancer patients. Methylation status of MSP product in plasma was also evaluated by direct sequencing. The expression of THRB mRNA in breast cancer tissues was lower than that in the normal tissues; hypermethylation was found in 32 of 40 breast cancer tissues (80%) and in 28 of 40 plasma samples (70%). Loss of THRB gene expression was associated with the CpG island hypermethylation of promoter regions. THRB gene CpG island methylation was not related to clinical pathologic parameters. Sequencing results were identical to agarose gel electrophoresis results. The present results indicate that hypermethylation of THRB as an alternative gene silencing mechanism is highly prevalent in breast cancer. Methylated tumor-specific DNA may serve as a plasma biomarker for prognosis in patients with breast cancer.

Selecting the most promising treatment strategy for breast cancer crucially depends on determining the correct subtype. In recent years, gene expression profiling has been investigated as an alternative to histochemical methods. Since databases like TCGA provide easy and unrestricted access to gene expression data for hundreds of patients, the challenge is to extract a minimal optimal set of genes with good prognostic properties from a large bulk of genes making a moderate contribution to classification. Several studies have successfully applied machine learning algorithms to solve this so-called gene selection problem. However, more diverse data from other OMICS technologies are available, including methylation. We hypothesize that combining methylation and gene expression data could already lead to a largely improved classification model, since the resulting model will reflect differences not only on the transcriptomic, but also on an epigenetic level. We compared so-called random forest derived classification models based on gene expression and methylation data alone, to a model based on the combined features and to a model based on the gold standard PAM50. We obtained bootstrap errors of 10-20% and classification error of 1-50%, depending on breast cancer subtype and model. The gene expression model was clearly superior to the methylation model, which was also reflected in the combined model, which mainly selected features from gene expression data. However, the methylation model was able to identify unique features not considered as relevant by the gene expression model, which might provide deeper insights into breast cancer subtype differentiation on an epigenetic level.. Selecting the most promising treatment strategy for breast cancer crucially depends on determining the correct subtype. In recent years, gene expression profiling has been investigated as an alternative to histochemical methods. Since databases like TCGA provide easy and unrestricted access to gene expression data for hundreds of patients, the challenge is to extract a minimal optimal set of genes with good prognostic properties from a large bulk of genes making a moderate contribution to classification. Several studies have successfully applied machine learning algorithms to solve this so-called gene selection problem. However, more diverse data from other OMICS technologies are available, including methylation. We hypothesize that combining methylation and gene expression data could already lead to a largely improved classification model, since the resulting model will reflect differences not only on the transcriptomic, but also on an epigenetic level. We compared so-called random forest derived classification models based on gene expression and methylation data alone, to a model based on the combined features and to a model based on the gold standard PAM50. We obtained bootstrap errors of 10-20% and classification error of 1-50%, depending on breast cancer subtype and model. The gene expression model was clearly superior to the methylation model, which was also reflected in the combined model, which mainly selected features from gene expression data. However, the methylation model was able to identify unique features not considered as relevant by the gene expression model, which might provide deeper insights into breast cancer subtype differentiation on an epigenetic level.

Bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6) is an important regulator of cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis in various types of tumor. In breast cancer, it was considered as a tumor suppressor. Our previous study also confirmed that BMP6 was a critical regulator of breast cancer drug resistance. However, little is known about how its expression is regulated and its mechanisms in breast cancer drug resistance. In the present study, we assessed the DNA methylation regulation of BMP6 based on the presence of a large CpG island in the BMP6 gene promoter. Quantitative DNA methylation analyses showed a significantly increased DNA methylation level in the drug-resistant cell line MCF-7/ADR compared to their parental cells MCF-7. Moreover, the drug-resistant cell line MCF-7/ADR showed an EMT phenotype confirmed by morphology and the expression of EMT marker gene. MCF-7 cells transfected with BMP6-specific shRNA vector also showed an EMT phenotype. The MCF-7/ADR cells treated with the recombinant BMP6 proteins reversed their EMT phenotype. These data indicated that hypermethylation modifications contributed to the regulation of BMP6 and induced an EMT phenotype of breast cancer during the acquisition of drug resistance.. Bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6) is an important regulator of cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis in various types of tumor. In breast cancer, it was considered as a tumor suppressor. Our previous study also confirmed that BMP6 was a critical regulator of breast cancer drug resistance. However, little is known about how its expression is regulated and its mechanisms in breast cancer drug resistance. In the present study, we assessed the DNA methylation regulation of BMP6 based on the presence of a large CpG island in the BMP6 gene promoter. Quantitative DNA methylation analyses showed a significantly increased DNA methylation level in the drug-resistant cell line MCF-7/ADR compared to their parental cells MCF-7. Moreover, the drug-resistant cell line MCF-7/ADR showed an EMT phenotype confirmed by morphology and the expression of EMT marker gene. MCF-7 cells transfected with BMP6-specific shRNA vector also showed an EMT phenotype. The MCF-7/ADR cells treated with the recombinant BMP6 proteins reversed their EMT phenotype. These data indicated that hypermethylation modifications contributed to the regulation of BMP6 and induced an EMT phenotype of breast cancer during the acquisition of drug resistance.

The E-cadherin gene (CDH1) is associated with poor prognosis and metastasis in patients with breast cancer, and methylation of its promoter is correlated with decreased gene expression. However, there is currently no direct evidence that CDH1 promoter methylation indicates poor prognosis in patients with breast cancer. In the present study, methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was applied to detect the methylation status of the CDH1 promoter in 137 primary breast cancer, 85 matched normal breast tissue and 13 lung metastasis specimens. Reverse transcription-quantitative PCR was used to assess the relative expression levels of CDH1 mRNA, and correlation analysis between CDH1 methylation status, and gene expression, clinicopathological characteristics and patient survival was performed. Methylation of CDH1 was identified in 40.9% (56/137) of primary breast cancer specimens, 61.5% (8/13) of lung metastasis specimens and none of the matched normal breast specimens. The downregulation of CDH1 mRNA and E-cadherin protein expression were identified to be significantly correlated with CDH1 methylation (P<0.05). In addition, CDH1 methylation was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis and estrogen receptor status of patients (P<0.05). In univariate analyses, patients with CDH1 methylation exhibited poor overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS; P<0.05). Furthermore, multivariate analyses revealed that CDH1 methylation was an independent prognostic factor predicting poor OS (HR, 1.737; 95% CI, 0.957-3.766; P=0.041) and DFS (HR, 2.018; 95% CI, 2.057-3.845; P=0.033) in patients with breast cancer. Therefore, the present study suggests that CDH1 promoter methylation may be correlated with breast carcinogenesis and indicates poor prognosis in patients with breast cancer.. The E-cadherin gene (CDH1) is associated with poor prognosis and metastasis in patients with breast cancer, and methylation of its promoter is correlated with decreased gene expression. However, there is currently no direct evidence that CDH1 promoter methylation indicates poor prognosis in patients with breast cancer. In the present study, methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was applied to detect the methylation status of the CDH1 promoter in 137 primary breast cancer, 85 matched normal breast tissue and 13 lung metastasis specimens. Reverse transcription-quantitative PCR was used to assess the relative expression levels of CDH1 mRNA, and correlation analysis between CDH1 methylation status, and gene expression, clinicopathological characteristics and patient survival was performed. Methylation of CDH1 was identified in 40.9% (56/137) of primary breast cancer specimens, 61.5% (8/13) of lung metastasis specimens and none of the matched normal breast specimens. The downregulation of CDH1 mRNA and E-cadherin protein expression were identified to be significantly correlated with CDH1 methylation (P<0.05). In addition, CDH1 methylation was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis and estrogen receptor status of patients (P<0.05). In univariate analyses, patients with CDH1 methylation exhibited poor overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS; P<0.05). Furthermore, multivariate analyses revealed that CDH1 methylation was an independent prognostic factor predicting poor OS (HR, 1.737; 95% CI, 0.957-3.766; P=0.041) and DFS (HR, 2.018; 95% CI, 2.057-3.845; P=0.033) in patients with breast cancer. Therefore, the present study suggests that CDH1 promoter methylation may be correlated with breast carcinogenesis and indicates poor prognosis in patients with breast cancer.

Overexpression of glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) increases multidrug resistance (MDR) in many cancer cells. However, its mechanism is unknown. The aim of the present study is to detect the association of methylation at the GCS gene promoter with its expression and MDR in invasive ductal breast cancer. 40 cases GCS-positive and 40 cases GCS-negative primary breast carcinoma samples, three drug-sensitive breast cancer cell lines and one multidrug-resistant breast cancer cell line were used. Immunohistochemistry, methylation-specific PCR (MSP), quantitative real-time (qPCR), westernblot and cytotoxicity assay techniques were employed. Thwe results revealed that there was a statistically negative correlation between GCS CpG islands methylation and GCSphenotype in patients with breast cancer. GCS CpG islands methylation was negatively associated with high ER, meanwhile positively with high HER-2 status. Similar results were obtained from the analysis of breast cancer cell lines. Treatment with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc) changed the GCS promoter methylation pattern in three sensitive cells and also caused increased drug resistance of them. These results suggested that the changes of DNA methylation status of the GCS promoter correlates with multidrug resistance in breast cancer.. Overexpression of glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) increases multidrug resistance (MDR) in many cancer cells. However, its mechanism is unknown. The aim of the present study is to detect the association of methylation at the GCS gene promoter with its expression and MDR in invasive ductal breast cancer. 40 cases GCS-positive and 40 cases GCS-negative primary breast carcinoma samples, three drug-sensitive breast cancer cell lines and one multidrug-resistant breast cancer cell line were used. Immunohistochemistry, methylation-specific PCR (MSP), quantitative real-time (qPCR), westernblot and cytotoxicity assay techniques were employed. Thwe results revealed that there was a statistically negative correlation between GCS CpG islands methylation and GCSphenotype in patients with breast cancer. GCS CpG islands methylation was negatively associated with high ER, meanwhile positively with high HER-2 status. Similar results were obtained from the analysis of breast cancer cell lines. Treatment with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc) changed the GCS promoter methylation pattern in three sensitive cells and also caused increased drug resistance of them. These results suggested that the changes of DNA methylation status of the GCS promoter correlates with multidrug resistance in breast cancer.

The development of carcinoma has been found to be associated with epigenetic modifications. The aim of this study was to estimate the methylation levels of FHIT and BRCA1 promoters using the bisulphite sequencing method (BSP) and high-resolution melting curve analysis (HRM) in the serum of patients with ductal breast carcinoma as a biomarker for the possible application of early diagnosis of breast cancer. The results showed that the methylation levels of both BRCA1 and FHIT promoters were higher in the serum of the breast ductal carcinoma group (BDC group) than those of the breast fibroadenoma group (BFA group), and the healthy individuals group (HI group). However, the methylation levels of the BRCA1 promoters were very low in all three groups compared to the levels of FHIT. The advanced quantitative detection of the samples with HRM showed that the FHIT promoter methylation level of the cfDNA in each serum was also very high in the BDC group compared to the HI group. The methylation level of FHIT was found to be significantly associated with breast cancer (p < 0.05). In conclusion, the methylation quantitative detection of FHIT promoter in serum may be useful for the early diagnosis of ductal breast carcinoma.. The development of carcinoma has been found to be associated with epigenetic modifications. The aim of this study was to estimate the methylation levels of FHIT and BRCA1 promoters using the bisulphite sequencing method (BSP) and high-resolution melting curve analysis (HRM) in the serum of patients with ductal breast carcinoma as a biomarker for the possible application of early diagnosis of breast cancer. The results showed that the methylation levels of both BRCA1 and FHIT promoters were higher in the serum of the breast ductal carcinoma group (BDC group) than those of the breast fibroadenoma group (BFA group), and the healthy individuals group (HI group). However, the methylation levels of the BRCA1 promoters were very low in all three groups compared to the levels of FHIT. The advanced quantitative detection of the samples with HRM showed that the FHIT promoter methylation level of the cfDNA in each serum was also very high in the BDC group compared to the HI group. The methylation level of FHIT was found to be significantly associated with breast cancer (p < 0.05). In conclusion, the methylation quantitative detection of FHIT promoter in serum may be useful for the early diagnosis of ductal breast carcinoma.

C/EBPalpha is an essential transcription factor involved in regulating the expression or function of certain cell-cycle regulators, including in breast cancer cells. Although protein arginine methyltransferases have been shown to play oncogenic roles in a variety of cancers, little is known about the role of arginine methylation in regulating the antiproliferation activity of C/EBPalpha. Here, we report that the protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is overexpressed in human breast cancer and that elevated PRMT1 correlates with cancer malignancy. RNA-sequencing analysis revealed that knockdown of PRMT1 in breast cancer cells is accompanied by a decrease in the expression of pro-proliferative genes, including cyclin D1. Furthermore, tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry identified PRMT1 as a component of the C/EBPalpha complex. C/EBPalpha associated with and was methylated by PRMT1 at three arginine residues (R35, R156, and R165). PRMT1-dependent methylation of C/EBPalpha promoted the expression of cyclin D1 by blocking the interaction between C/EBPalpha and its corepressor HDAC3, which resulted in rapid growth of tumor cells during the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Inhibition of PRMT1 significantly impeded the growth of cancer cells from patients with triple-negative breast cancer. This evidence that PRMT1 mediates C/EBPalpha methylation sheds light on a novel pathway and potential therapeutic target in breast cancer. SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides novel mechanistic insight of the role of the arginine methyltransferase PRMT1 in breast cancer pathogenesis.. C/EBPalpha is an essential transcription factor involved in regulating the expression or function of certain cell-cycle regulators, including in breast cancer cells. Although protein arginine methyltransferases have been shown to play oncogenic roles in a variety of cancers, little is known about the role of arginine methylation in regulating the antiproliferation activity of C/EBPalpha. Here, we report that the protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is overexpressed in human breast cancer and that elevated PRMT1 correlates with cancer malignancy. RNA-sequencing analysis revealed that knockdown of PRMT1 in breast cancer cells is accompanied by a decrease in the expression of pro-proliferative genes, including cyclin D1. Furthermore, tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry identified PRMT1 as a component of the C/EBPalpha complex. C/EBPalpha associated with and was methylated by PRMT1 at three arginine residues (R35, R156, and R165). PRMT1-dependent methylation of C/EBPalpha promoted the expression of cyclin D1 by blocking the interaction between C/EBPalpha and its corepressor HDAC3, which resulted in rapid growth of tumor cells during the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Inhibition of PRMT1 significantly impeded the growth of cancer cells from patients with triple-negative breast cancer. This evidence that PRMT1 mediates C/EBPalpha methylation sheds light on a novel pathway and potential therapeutic target in breast cancer. SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides novel mechanistic insight of the role of the arginine methyltransferase PRMT1 in breast cancer pathogenesis.

PURPOSE: Although the evidence linking exposure to light at night (LAN) and breast cancer risk continues to accumulate, the molecular mechanisms driving this association remain to be fully elucidated. We have previously suggested that long-term exposure to LAN through shiftwork may result in dysregulated patterns of methylation genome-wide. In this study, we investigate the link between miR-34b, a miRNA suggested to be an important tumor suppressor, and shiftwork-related breast cancer. METHODS: Methylation states in the miR-34b promoter region were previously compared between 10 female long-term shiftworkers and 10 folate intake- and age-matched female dayworkers participating in the Danish "Diet, Cancer and Health" prospective cohort study. In order to further explore the functional role of miR-34b in breast tumorigenesis, a genome-wide expression microarray was carried out in miR-34b-overexpressed MCF-7 breast cancer cells and the identified transcripts were further analyzed for network and functional interrelatedness using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. RESULTS: We observed a 49.1 % increase in miR-34b promoter methylation among shiftworkers at a CpG site in this region (p = 0.016). Transfection of the miR-34b mimic in an MCF-7 breast cancer cell line induced differential expression of 230 transcripts that are involved in the interferon-mediated antiviral response as well as apoptotic and antiproliferative gene networks. CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results suggest that long-term shiftwork may increase the risk of breast cancer via methylation-based suppression of miR-34b and a consequent reduction in immunomediated anti-tumor capacity and support our previous findings that LAN may induce epigenetic alteration of cancer-relevant microRNAs.. PURPOSE: Although the evidence linking exposure to light at night (LAN) and breast cancer risk continues to accumulate, the molecular mechanisms driving this association remain to be fully elucidated. We have previously suggested that long-term exposure to LAN through shiftwork may result in dysregulated patterns of methylation genome-wide. In this study, we investigate the link between miR-34b, a miRNA suggested to be an important tumor suppressor, and shiftwork-related breast cancer. METHODS: Methylation states in the miR-34b promoter region were previously compared between 10 female long-term shiftworkers and 10 folate intake- and age-matched female dayworkers participating in the Danish "Diet, Cancer and Health" prospective cohort study. In order to further explore the functional role of miR-34b in breast tumorigenesis, a genome-wide expression microarray was carried out in miR-34b-overexpressed MCF-7 breast cancer cells and the identified transcripts were further analyzed for network and functional interrelatedness using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. RESULTS: We observed a 49.1 % increase in miR-34b promoter methylation among shiftworkers at a CpG site in this region (p = 0.016). Transfection of the miR-34b mimic in an MCF-7 breast cancer cell line induced differential expression of 230 transcripts that are involved in the interferon-mediated antiviral response as well as apoptotic and antiproliferative gene networks. CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results suggest that long-term shiftwork may increase the risk of breast cancer via methylation-based suppression of miR-34b and a consequent reduction in immunomediated anti-tumor capacity and support our previous findings that LAN may induce epigenetic alteration of cancer-relevant microRNAs.

OBJECTIVE: In this study, we firstly verified how miR-375 is downregulated in breast cancer cells with multi-drug resistance (MDR) and further investigated the regulative effect of miR-375 on Ybx1 expression. MATERIALS AND METHODS: MiR-375 expression and promoter methylation status were studied by retrieving data in NCBI GEO Datasets, qRT-PCR and Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) assay. Drug sensitivity of the cancer cells was assessed using MTT assay. The binding between miR-375 and YBX1 gene was predicted using Targetscan 7.1 and verified using western blot and dual luciferase assay. RESULTS: MiR-375 is significantly downregulated in both MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells than in MCF-7 cells. MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells had significantly higher level of promoter methylation than MCF-7 cells. 5-AZA-dC treatment significantly reduced the methylation in MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells and increased miR-375 expression. MiR-375 can directly target 3'UTR of YBX1 and thereby decrease its expression in MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells. Both miR-375 overexpression and YBX1 knockdown significantly decreased P-gp expression and increased chemosensitivity of the cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: MiR-375 is downregulated in MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells, and its downregulation is a result of promoter methylation. MiR-375 can directly target 3'UTR of YBX1 and thereby decrease its expression, which might be an important mechanism of MDR in breast cancer cells.. OBJECTIVE: In this study, we firstly verified how miR-375 is downregulated in breast cancer cells with multi-drug resistance (MDR) and further investigated the regulative effect of miR-375 on Ybx1 expression. MATERIALS AND METHODS: MiR-375 expression and promoter methylation status were studied by retrieving data in NCBI GEO Datasets, qRT-PCR and Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) assay. Drug sensitivity of the cancer cells was assessed using MTT assay. The binding between miR-375 and YBX1 gene was predicted using Targetscan 7.1 and verified using western blot and dual luciferase assay. RESULTS: MiR-375 is significantly downregulated in both MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells than in MCF-7 cells. MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells had significantly higher level of promoter methylation than MCF-7 cells. 5-AZA-dC treatment significantly reduced the methylation in MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells and increased miR-375 expression. MiR-375 can directly target 3'UTR of YBX1 and thereby decrease its expression in MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells. Both miR-375 overexpression and YBX1 knockdown significantly decreased P-gp expression and increased chemosensitivity of the cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: MiR-375 is downregulated in MCF-7/ADM and MCF-7/PTX cells, and its downregulation is a result of promoter methylation. MiR-375 can directly target 3'UTR of YBX1 and thereby decrease its expression, which might be an important mechanism of MDR in breast cancer cells.

P16(INK4a) is a tumor suppressor gene frequently inactivated by aberrant promoter hypermethylation. In this study, p16(INK4a) methylation was evaluated in intraductal proliferative lesions of the breast, using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight) and methylation-sensitive restriction endonuclease polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry was performed to compare and validate the methylation analysis. P16(INK4a) methylation associated with oncogene cyclinD1 expression, detected through the use of in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, was likewise characterized. P16(INK4a) methylation displayed varying significance among different types of intraductal proliferative lesions. Both the positive rate and the median quantitative methylation value increased with the evolution of intraductal proliferative lesions through the use of quantitative and qualitative assays. P16(INK4a) methylation was positively correlated to cyclinD1 overexpression. This study demonstrated that p16(INK4a) methylation served as the silencing mechanism of p16(INK4a) protein expression and played a crucial role in the intraductal proliferative lesions' progression. In the differential diagnosis of intraductal proliferative lesions, quantitative DNA methylation analysis of p16(INK4a) by MethyLight may be used as a surrogate, especially to distinguish atypical ductal hyperplasia from usual ductal hyperplasia and low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ. Furthermore, this study discovered that flat epithelial atypia do not share similar molecular profiles of p16(INK4a) epigenetic modification with atypical ductal hyperplasia and low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ.. P16(INK4a) is a tumor suppressor gene frequently inactivated by aberrant promoter hypermethylation. In this study, p16(INK4a) methylation was evaluated in intraductal proliferative lesions of the breast, using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight) and methylation-sensitive restriction endonuclease polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry was performed to compare and validate the methylation analysis. P16(INK4a) methylation associated with oncogene cyclinD1 expression, detected through the use of in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, was likewise characterized. P16(INK4a) methylation displayed varying significance among different types of intraductal proliferative lesions. Both the positive rate and the median quantitative methylation value increased with the evolution of intraductal proliferative lesions through the use of quantitative and qualitative assays. P16(INK4a) methylation was positively correlated to cyclinD1 overexpression. This study demonstrated that p16(INK4a) methylation served as the silencing mechanism of p16(INK4a) protein expression and played a crucial role in the intraductal proliferative lesions' progression. In the differential diagnosis of intraductal proliferative lesions, quantitative DNA methylation analysis of p16(INK4a) by MethyLight may be used as a surrogate, especially to distinguish atypical ductal hyperplasia from usual ductal hyperplasia and low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ. Furthermore, this study discovered that flat epithelial atypia do not share similar molecular profiles of p16(INK4a) epigenetic modification with atypical ductal hyperplasia and low-grade ductal carcinoma in situ.

BACKGROUND: Loss of p16(INK4A) due to promoter hypermethylation is correlated with the ability to acquire centrosomal abnormalities in variant human mammary epithelial cells. gamma-Tubulin is a highly conserved component of centrosome in most animal cells and gamma-tubulin protein overexpression could lead to centrosome aberration. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A large series of breast premalignant lesions and carcinoma was analyzed. Real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry were carried out to measure gamma-tubulin copy numbers and protein expression. MethyLight and immunohistochemistry were carried out to determine p16(INK4A) methylation and protein expression. RESULTS: gamma-Tubulin protein expression was concordant with gene amplification; both of them were found to increase with atypical ductal hyperplasia-carcinoma sequence. The median value and positive rate of p16(INK4a) methylation increased while protein expression displayed a decreasing trend. P16(INK4a) methylation showed a firm association with gamma-tubulin gene amplification. CONCLUSION: gamma-Tubulin gene amplification and the concomitant protein overexpression present not only in invasive carcinoma but also in a significant fraction of atypical hyperplasia and in situ carcinomas. P16(INK4a) methylation and gamma-tubulin gene amplification had a synergistic effect on tumor progression. The synergism might arise as a result of the combined influence that p16(INK4a) and gamma-tubulin have on the G1-S cell cycle checkpoints and centrosome.. BACKGROUND: Loss of p16(INK4A) due to promoter hypermethylation is correlated with the ability to acquire centrosomal abnormalities in variant human mammary epithelial cells. gamma-Tubulin is a highly conserved component of centrosome in most animal cells and gamma-tubulin protein overexpression could lead to centrosome aberration. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A large series of breast premalignant lesions and carcinoma was analyzed. Real-time quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry were carried out to measure gamma-tubulin copy numbers and protein expression. MethyLight and immunohistochemistry were carried out to determine p16(INK4A) methylation and protein expression. RESULTS: gamma-Tubulin protein expression was concordant with gene amplification; both of them were found to increase with atypical ductal hyperplasia-carcinoma sequence. The median value and positive rate of p16(INK4a) methylation increased while protein expression displayed a decreasing trend. P16(INK4a) methylation showed a firm association with gamma-tubulin gene amplification. CONCLUSION: gamma-Tubulin gene amplification and the concomitant protein overexpression present not only in invasive carcinoma but also in a significant fraction of atypical hyperplasia and in situ carcinomas. P16(INK4a) methylation and gamma-tubulin gene amplification had a synergistic effect on tumor progression. The synergism might arise as a result of the combined influence that p16(INK4a) and gamma-tubulin have on the G1-S cell cycle checkpoints and centrosome.

Protocadherin-10 (PCDH10) is a tumor suppressor gene. Its expression level is downregulated by promoter methylation in certain types of human tumors. The aim of the present study was to examine the expression level and promoter methylation status of PCDH10 in breast cancer cells and to evaluate the association of PCDH10 methylation and tumor progression and prognosis. MethyLight was used to detect the methylation status of PCDH10 in breast cancer tissues and healthy breast tissues. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to assess the mRNA expression level of PCDH10, as well as to evaluate the association between PCDH10 methylation and clinicopathological features, along with patients' overall survival (OS). PCDH10 5'-C-phosphate-G-3' (CpG) methylated sites were identified in tumor tissues and matched healthy tissues (n=392). Tumor tissues and matched healthy tissues exhibited identifiable PCR results, with PCDH10 gene promoter methylation identified in ductal carcinoma in situ (66%), invasive ductal carcinoma (82%), invasive ductal carcinoma with lymph node metastasis (85.32%) and hereditary breast cancer tissues (72.37%). PCDH10 mRNA expression was significantly decreased in breast cancer tissues compared with healthy breast tissues (P=0.032). PCDH10 methylation was associated with tumor size (P=0.004), but not associated with other clinical factors. Survival analysis revealed that the patients exhibiting methylated-PCDH10 had significantly poorer OS times than patients exhibiting unmethylated-PCDH10 (P<0.0001). Receiver operating characteristic analysis indicated a sensitivity of 75%, a specificity of 62.5%, and an area under the curve of 0.682 for PCDH10. Additionally, the results of the present study indicated that PCDH10 methylation status may be a useful diagnostic and prognostic evaluation biomarker for breast cancer. The results suggested that PCDH10 methylation is a common occurrence in primary breast cancer and is associated with poor survival rates among patients with breast cancer.. Protocadherin-10 (PCDH10) is a tumor suppressor gene. Its expression level is downregulated by promoter methylation in certain types of human tumors. The aim of the present study was to examine the expression level and promoter methylation status of PCDH10 in breast cancer cells and to evaluate the association of PCDH10 methylation and tumor progression and prognosis. MethyLight was used to detect the methylation status of PCDH10 in breast cancer tissues and healthy breast tissues. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to assess the mRNA expression level of PCDH10, as well as to evaluate the association between PCDH10 methylation and clinicopathological features, along with patients' overall survival (OS). PCDH10 5'-C-phosphate-G-3' (CpG) methylated sites were identified in tumor tissues and matched healthy tissues (n=392). Tumor tissues and matched healthy tissues exhibited identifiable PCR results, with PCDH10 gene promoter methylation identified in ductal carcinoma in situ (66%), invasive ductal carcinoma (82%), invasive ductal carcinoma with lymph node metastasis (85.32%) and hereditary breast cancer tissues (72.37%). PCDH10 mRNA expression was significantly decreased in breast cancer tissues compared with healthy breast tissues (P=0.032). PCDH10 methylation was associated with tumor size (P=0.004), but not associated with other clinical factors. Survival analysis revealed that the patients exhibiting methylated-PCDH10 had significantly poorer OS times than patients exhibiting unmethylated-PCDH10 (P<0.0001). Receiver operating characteristic analysis indicated a sensitivity of 75%, a specificity of 62.5%, and an area under the curve of 0.682 for PCDH10. Additionally, the results of the present study indicated that PCDH10 methylation status may be a useful diagnostic and prognostic evaluation biomarker for breast cancer. The results suggested that PCDH10 methylation is a common occurrence in primary breast cancer and is associated with poor survival rates among patients with breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Claudin-6 (CLDN6), a member of claudin transmembrane protein family, has recently been reported to be undetectable or at low levels in human breast cancer cell lines and tissues and plays a role in suppression of migration and invasion in breast cancer cells. In addition, it is reported that CLDN6 expression is regulated by DNA methylation in various human cancers and cell lines. However, it is unclear how DNA methylation regulates CLDN6 expression. Here we show the mechanism by which DNA methylation regulates CLDN6 expression in human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. METHODS: RT-PCR, Western blot and immunofluorescent staining were utilized to investigate CLDN6 expression in breast cancer tissues and MCF-7 cells. Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) was applied to determine DNA methylation status in CLDN6 gene promoter region. Wound-healing assay and invasion assay were utilized to test mobility of MCF-7 cells treated with 5-aza-dC (DNA methyltransferase inhibitor). MeCP2 binding, H3Ac and H4Ac in CLDN6 promoter region were analyzed by ChIP assay. Nuclease accessibility assay was performed for analysis of the chromatin conformation of CLDN6 gene. To study the role of CLDN6 in malignant progression, we used RNAi to knockdown CLDN6 expression in MCF-7 cells treated with 5-aza-dC, and examined the mobility of MCF-7 cells by wound-healing assay and invasion assay. RESULTS: 5-aza-dC and TSA (histone deacetylase inhibitor) application induced CLDN6 expression in MCF-7 cells respectively and synergistically. 5-aza-dC treatment induced CLDN6 demethylation, inhibited MeCP2 binding to CLDN6 promoter and increased H3Ac and H4Ac in the promoter. In addition, TSA increased H4Ac, not H3Ac in the promoter. The chromatin structure of CLDN6 gene became looser than the control group after treating with 5-aza-dC in MCF-7 cells. 5-aza-dC up-regulated CLDN6 expression and suppressed migration and invasion in MCF-7 cells, whereas CLDN6 silence restored tumor malignance in MCF-7 cells. CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation down-regulates CLDN6 expression through MeCP2 binding to the CLDN6 promoter, deacetylating H3 and H4, and altering chromatin structure, consequently promoting migratory and invasive phenotype in MCF-7 cells.. BACKGROUND: Claudin-6 (CLDN6), a member of claudin transmembrane protein family, has recently been reported to be undetectable or at low levels in human breast cancer cell lines and tissues and plays a role in suppression of migration and invasion in breast cancer cells. In addition, it is reported that CLDN6 expression is regulated by DNA methylation in various human cancers and cell lines. However, it is unclear how DNA methylation regulates CLDN6 expression. Here we show the mechanism by which DNA methylation regulates CLDN6 expression in human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. METHODS: RT-PCR, Western blot and immunofluorescent staining were utilized to investigate CLDN6 expression in breast cancer tissues and MCF-7 cells. Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) was applied to determine DNA methylation status in CLDN6 gene promoter region. Wound-healing assay and invasion assay were utilized to test mobility of MCF-7 cells treated with 5-aza-dC (DNA methyltransferase inhibitor). MeCP2 binding, H3Ac and H4Ac in CLDN6 promoter region were analyzed by ChIP assay. Nuclease accessibility assay was performed for analysis of the chromatin conformation of CLDN6 gene. To study the role of CLDN6 in malignant progression, we used RNAi to knockdown CLDN6 expression in MCF-7 cells treated with 5-aza-dC, and examined the mobility of MCF-7 cells by wound-healing assay and invasion assay. RESULTS: 5-aza-dC and TSA (histone deacetylase inhibitor) application induced CLDN6 expression in MCF-7 cells respectively and synergistically. 5-aza-dC treatment induced CLDN6 demethylation, inhibited MeCP2 binding to CLDN6 promoter and increased H3Ac and H4Ac in the promoter. In addition, TSA increased H4Ac, not H3Ac in the promoter. The chromatin structure of CLDN6 gene became looser than the control group after treating with 5-aza-dC in MCF-7 cells. 5-aza-dC up-regulated CLDN6 expression and suppressed migration and invasion in MCF-7 cells, whereas CLDN6 silence restored tumor malignance in MCF-7 cells. CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation down-regulates CLDN6 expression through MeCP2 binding to the CLDN6 promoter, deacetylating H3 and H4, and altering chromatin structure, consequently promoting migratory and invasive phenotype in MCF-7 cells.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Protein expression product of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is an important component of Wnt signal transduction pathway. APC gene inactivation leads to dysfunction of beta-catenin protein degradation, and then activates Tcf/Lef and causes abnormal transcription of oncogenes, such as c-myc, c-jun and cyclin D1, finally leads to carcinogenesis. This study was to investigate the correlation of methylation status of APC gene promoter 1A to protein expression of APC gene in breast cancer, and analyze the correlation of aberrant methylation of APC gene to clinicopathologic features of breast cancer. METHODS: Methylation status of APC gene promoter 1A in 76 specimens of breast cancer and corresponding adjacent tissues was detected by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction; the expression of APC protein was detected by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: The methylation rate of APC gene promoter 1A was significantly higher in breast cancer than in pericancerous normal breast tissue (36.8% vs. 0, P < 0.05). The positive rate of APC protein was significantly lower in breast cancer than in normal breast tissue (52.4% vs. 100%, P < 0.05). The promoter methylation of APC gene was positively correlated to TNM stage (r=0.296, P < 0.05), but negatively correlated to the expression of APC protein (r=-0.368, P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Abnormal methylation of APC gene occurs in the progression of breast cancer, which is the main cause for the absence of APC protein expression, and the major mechanism of inactivation of APC gene.. BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Protein expression product of adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is an important component of Wnt signal transduction pathway. APC gene inactivation leads to dysfunction of beta-catenin protein degradation, and then activates Tcf/Lef and causes abnormal transcription of oncogenes, such as c-myc, c-jun and cyclin D1, finally leads to carcinogenesis. This study was to investigate the correlation of methylation status of APC gene promoter 1A to protein expression of APC gene in breast cancer, and analyze the correlation of aberrant methylation of APC gene to clinicopathologic features of breast cancer. METHODS: Methylation status of APC gene promoter 1A in 76 specimens of breast cancer and corresponding adjacent tissues was detected by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction; the expression of APC protein was detected by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: The methylation rate of APC gene promoter 1A was significantly higher in breast cancer than in pericancerous normal breast tissue (36.8% vs. 0, P < 0.05). The positive rate of APC protein was significantly lower in breast cancer than in normal breast tissue (52.4% vs. 100%, P < 0.05). The promoter methylation of APC gene was positively correlated to TNM stage (r=0.296, P < 0.05), but negatively correlated to the expression of APC protein (r=-0.368, P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Abnormal methylation of APC gene occurs in the progression of breast cancer, which is the main cause for the absence of APC protein expression, and the major mechanism of inactivation of APC gene.

p16(INK4a) is a tumor suppressor gene, frequently hypermethylated in breast cancer; this epigenetic silencing of p16(INK4a) occurs early in carcinogenesis. The risk factors and functional consequences of p16(INK4a) methylation are unknown. Alcohol consumption, a breast cancer risk factor, impedes folate metabolism and may thereby alter gene methylation since folate plays a pivotal role in DNA methylation. In a cross-sectional study of 138 women with no history of breast cancer who underwent reduction mammoplasty, we studied breast cancer risk factors, plasma and breast folate concentrations, variation in one-carbon metabolism genes, p16(INK4a) promoter methylation and P16 protein expression. Logistic regression was used to estimate multivariable-adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). p16(INK4a) methylation was negatively correlated with P16 expression (r = -0.28; P = 0.002). Alcohol consumption was associated with lower breast folate (P = 0.03), higher p16(INK4a) promoter methylation (P = 0.007) and less P16 expression (P = 0.002). Higher breast folate concentrations were associated with lower p16(INK4a) promoter methylation (P = 0.06). Genetic variation in MTRR (rs1801394) and MTHFD1 (rs1950902) was associated with higher p16 (INK4a) promoter methylation (OR = 2.66, 95% CI: 1.11-6.42 and OR = 2.72, 95% CI: 1.12-6.66, respectively), whereas variation in TYMS (rs502396) was associated with less P16 protein expression (OR = 0.22, 95% CI: 0.05-0.99). Given that this is the first study to indicate that alcohol consumption, breast folate and variation in one-carbon metabolism genes are associated with p16(INK4a) promoter methylation and P16 protein expression in healthy tissues; these findings require replication.. p16(INK4a) is a tumor suppressor gene, frequently hypermethylated in breast cancer; this epigenetic silencing of p16(INK4a) occurs early in carcinogenesis. The risk factors and functional consequences of p16(INK4a) methylation are unknown. Alcohol consumption, a breast cancer risk factor, impedes folate metabolism and may thereby alter gene methylation since folate plays a pivotal role in DNA methylation. In a cross-sectional study of 138 women with no history of breast cancer who underwent reduction mammoplasty, we studied breast cancer risk factors, plasma and breast folate concentrations, variation in one-carbon metabolism genes, p16(INK4a) promoter methylation and P16 protein expression. Logistic regression was used to estimate multivariable-adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). p16(INK4a) methylation was negatively correlated with P16 expression (r = -0.28; P = 0.002). Alcohol consumption was associated with lower breast folate (P = 0.03), higher p16(INK4a) promoter methylation (P = 0.007) and less P16 expression (P = 0.002). Higher breast folate concentrations were associated with lower p16(INK4a) promoter methylation (P = 0.06). Genetic variation in MTRR (rs1801394) and MTHFD1 (rs1950902) was associated with higher p16 (INK4a) promoter methylation (OR = 2.66, 95% CI: 1.11-6.42 and OR = 2.72, 95% CI: 1.12-6.66, respectively), whereas variation in TYMS (rs502396) was associated with less P16 protein expression (OR = 0.22, 95% CI: 0.05-0.99). Given that this is the first study to indicate that alcohol consumption, breast folate and variation in one-carbon metabolism genes are associated with p16(INK4a) promoter methylation and P16 protein expression in healthy tissues; these findings require replication.

Genome-wide DNA hypomethylation is an early event in the carcinogenic process. Percent methylation of long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) is a biomarker of genome-wide methylation and is a potential biomarker for breast cancer. Understanding factors associated with percent LINE-1 DNA methylation in histologically normal tissues could provide insight into early stages of carcinogenesis. In a cross-sectional study of 121 healthy women with no prior history of cancer who underwent reduction mammoplasty, we examined associations between plasma and breast folate, genetic variation in one-carbon metabolism, and percent LINE-1 methylation using multivariable regression models (adjusting for race, oral contraceptive use, and alcohol use). Results are expressed as the ratio of LINE-1 methylation relative to that of the referent group, with the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI). We found no significant associations between plasma or breast folate and percent LINE-1 methylation. Variation in MTHFR, MTR, and MTRR were significantly associated with percent LINE-1 methylation. Variant allele carriers of MTHFR A1289C had 4% lower LINE-1 methylation (Ratio 0.96, 95% CI 0.93-0.98), while variant allele carriers of MTR A2756G (Ratio 1.03, 95% CI 1.01-1.06) and MTRR A66G (Ratio 1.03, 95% CI 1.01-1.06) had 3% higher LINE-1 methylation, compared to those carrying the more common genotypes of these SNPs. DNA methylation of LINE-1 elements in histologically normal breast tissues is influenced by polymorphisms in genes in the one-carbon metabolism pathway. Future studies are needed to investigate the sociodemographic, environmental and additional genetic determinants of DNA methylation in breast tissues and the impact on breast cancer susceptibility.. Genome-wide DNA hypomethylation is an early event in the carcinogenic process. Percent methylation of long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) is a biomarker of genome-wide methylation and is a potential biomarker for breast cancer. Understanding factors associated with percent LINE-1 DNA methylation in histologically normal tissues could provide insight into early stages of carcinogenesis. In a cross-sectional study of 121 healthy women with no prior history of cancer who underwent reduction mammoplasty, we examined associations between plasma and breast folate, genetic variation in one-carbon metabolism, and percent LINE-1 methylation using multivariable regression models (adjusting for race, oral contraceptive use, and alcohol use). Results are expressed as the ratio of LINE-1 methylation relative to that of the referent group, with the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI). We found no significant associations between plasma or breast folate and percent LINE-1 methylation. Variation in MTHFR, MTR, and MTRR were significantly associated with percent LINE-1 methylation. Variant allele carriers of MTHFR A1289C had 4% lower LINE-1 methylation (Ratio 0.96, 95% CI 0.93-0.98), while variant allele carriers of MTR A2756G (Ratio 1.03, 95% CI 1.01-1.06) and MTRR A66G (Ratio 1.03, 95% CI 1.01-1.06) had 3% higher LINE-1 methylation, compared to those carrying the more common genotypes of these SNPs. DNA methylation of LINE-1 elements in histologically normal breast tissues is influenced by polymorphisms in genes in the one-carbon metabolism pathway. Future studies are needed to investigate the sociodemographic, environmental and additional genetic determinants of DNA methylation in breast tissues and the impact on breast cancer susceptibility.

BACKGROUND: Relapse risk assessment and individual treatment recommendations remain suboptimal for breast cancer patients. In the light of existing preclinical and clinical data, we studied NT5E (5'-nucleotidase, ecto) expression and NT5E CpG island methylation in breast cancer. METHODS: We used RT-PCR, qPCR, methylation-specific PCR and pyrosequencing to analyse NT5E in breast carcinoma cell lines and primary and breast carcinomas. RESULTS: NT5E CpG island methylation was inversely associated with NT5E expression in breast carcinoma cell lines. In clinical series, patients whose primary tumours had NT5E CpG island methylation were less likely to develop metastasis (P=0.003, OR=0.34, 95% CI: 0.17-0.69). In 3/4 paired samples, NT5E was methylated in primary tumours and demethylated in CNS metastases. Patients progressing to non-visceral as compared with visceral metastases were more likely to have NT5E CpG island methylation in primary tumours (P=0.01, OR=11.8). Patients with tumours lacking detectable methylation had shorter disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0.001, HR=2.7) and overall survival (OS) (P=0.001, HR=3). The favourable prognostic value of NT5E methylation was confirmed in oestrogen receptor negative (P=0.011, HR=3.27, 95% CI: 1.31-8.12) and in triple negative cases (P=0.004; HR=6.2, 95% CI: 1.9-20). Moreover, we observed a more favourable outcome to adjuvant chemotherapy in patients whose tumours were positive for NT5E CpG island methylation: DFS (P=0.0016, HR=5.1, 95% CI: 1.8-14.37) and OS (P=0.0005, HR=7.4, 95% CI: 2.416-23.08). CONCLUSION: NT5E CpG island methylation is a promising breast cancer biomarker.. BACKGROUND: Relapse risk assessment and individual treatment recommendations remain suboptimal for breast cancer patients. In the light of existing preclinical and clinical data, we studied NT5E (5'-nucleotidase, ecto) expression and NT5E CpG island methylation in breast cancer. METHODS: We used RT-PCR, qPCR, methylation-specific PCR and pyrosequencing to analyse NT5E in breast carcinoma cell lines and primary and breast carcinomas. RESULTS: NT5E CpG island methylation was inversely associated with NT5E expression in breast carcinoma cell lines. In clinical series, patients whose primary tumours had NT5E CpG island methylation were less likely to develop metastasis (P=0.003, OR=0.34, 95% CI: 0.17-0.69). In 3/4 paired samples, NT5E was methylated in primary tumours and demethylated in CNS metastases. Patients progressing to non-visceral as compared with visceral metastases were more likely to have NT5E CpG island methylation in primary tumours (P=0.01, OR=11.8). Patients with tumours lacking detectable methylation had shorter disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0.001, HR=2.7) and overall survival (OS) (P=0.001, HR=3). The favourable prognostic value of NT5E methylation was confirmed in oestrogen receptor negative (P=0.011, HR=3.27, 95% CI: 1.31-8.12) and in triple negative cases (P=0.004; HR=6.2, 95% CI: 1.9-20). Moreover, we observed a more favourable outcome to adjuvant chemotherapy in patients whose tumours were positive for NT5E CpG island methylation: DFS (P=0.0016, HR=5.1, 95% CI: 1.8-14.37) and OS (P=0.0005, HR=7.4, 95% CI: 2.416-23.08). CONCLUSION: NT5E CpG island methylation is a promising breast cancer biomarker.

We analyzed Wilms' tumor suppressor 1 (WT1) expression and its regulation by promoter methylation in a panel of normal breast epithelial samples and primary carcinomas. Contrary to previous reports, WT1 protein was strongly expressed in primary carcinomas (27 of 31 tumors) but not in normal breast epithelium (1 of 20 samples). Additionally, the WT1 promoter was methylated in 6 of 19 (32%) primary tumors, which nevertheless expressed WT1. The promoter is not methylated in normal epithelium. Thus, although tumor-specific methylation of WT1 is established in primary breast cancer at a low frequency, other transcriptional regulatory mechanisms appear to supercede its effects in these tumors. Our results demonstrate expression of WT1 in mammary neoplasia, and that WT1 may not have a tumor suppressor role in breast cancer.. We analyzed Wilms' tumor suppressor 1 (WT1) expression and its regulation by promoter methylation in a panel of normal breast epithelial samples and primary carcinomas. Contrary to previous reports, WT1 protein was strongly expressed in primary carcinomas (27 of 31 tumors) but not in normal breast epithelium (1 of 20 samples). Additionally, the WT1 promoter was methylated in 6 of 19 (32%) primary tumors, which nevertheless expressed WT1. The promoter is not methylated in normal epithelium. Thus, although tumor-specific methylation of WT1 is established in primary breast cancer at a low frequency, other transcriptional regulatory mechanisms appear to supercede its effects in these tumors. Our results demonstrate expression of WT1 in mammary neoplasia, and that WT1 may not have a tumor suppressor role in breast cancer.

Changes in the levels of expression of proapoptotic genes APAF1 and DAPK1 and antiapoptotic gene BCL2 were studied by real time PCR in specimens of tumors and histologically intact tissue from 28 patients with breast cancer. The expression of APAF1 and DAPK1 was below the normal in the majority of tumor samples (p<0.05), while the level of BCL2 mRNA more often surpassed the normal (p<0.1). Study of the same sample of specimens by methylspecific PCR showed predominance of APAF1 and DAPK1 hypermethylation (p<0.05 and p<0.1, respectively) and more frequent hypomethylation of BCL2. A significant correlation between changes in the levels of expression and methylation (r=0.40-0.49; p<0.05) was detected for all three genes (APAF1, DAPK1, and BCL2). The results suggest that methylation play an important role in the regulation of these apoptosis system genes in breast cancer.. Changes in the levels of expression of proapoptotic genes APAF1 and DAPK1 and antiapoptotic gene BCL2 were studied by real time PCR in specimens of tumors and histologically intact tissue from 28 patients with breast cancer. The expression of APAF1 and DAPK1 was below the normal in the majority of tumor samples (p<0.05), while the level of BCL2 mRNA more often surpassed the normal (p<0.1). Study of the same sample of specimens by methylspecific PCR showed predominance of APAF1 and DAPK1 hypermethylation (p<0.05 and p<0.1, respectively) and more frequent hypomethylation of BCL2. A significant correlation between changes in the levels of expression and methylation (r=0.40-0.49; p<0.05) was detected for all three genes (APAF1, DAPK1, and BCL2). The results suggest that methylation play an important role in the regulation of these apoptosis system genes in breast cancer.

Using genome-wide expression profiling of a panel of 27 human mammary cell lines with different mechanisms of E-cadherin inactivation, we evaluated the relationship between E-cadherin status and gene expression levels. Expression profiles of cell lines with E-cadherin (CDH1) promoter methylation were significantly different from those with CDH1 expression or, surprisingly, those with CDH1 truncating mutations. Furthermore, we found no significant differentially expressed genes between cell lines with wild-type and mutated CDH1. The expression profile complied with the fibroblastic morphology of the cell lines with promoter methylation, suggestive of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). All other lines, also the cases with CDH1 mutations, had epithelial features. Three non-tumorigenic mammary cell lines derived from normal breast epithelium also showed CDH1 promoter methylation, a fibroblastic phenotype and expression profile. We suggest that CDH1 promoter methylation, but not mutational inactivation, is part of an entire programme, resulting in EMT and increased invasiveness in breast cancer. The molecular events that are part of this programme can be inferred from the differentially expressed genes and include genes from the TGFbeta pathway, transcription factors involved in CDH1 regulation (i.e. ZFHX1B, SNAI2, but not SNAI1, TWIST), annexins, AP1/2 transcription factors and members of the actin and intermediate filament cytoskeleton organisation.. Using genome-wide expression profiling of a panel of 27 human mammary cell lines with different mechanisms of E-cadherin inactivation, we evaluated the relationship between E-cadherin status and gene expression levels. Expression profiles of cell lines with E-cadherin (CDH1) promoter methylation were significantly different from those with CDH1 expression or, surprisingly, those with CDH1 truncating mutations. Furthermore, we found no significant differentially expressed genes between cell lines with wild-type and mutated CDH1. The expression profile complied with the fibroblastic morphology of the cell lines with promoter methylation, suggestive of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). All other lines, also the cases with CDH1 mutations, had epithelial features. Three non-tumorigenic mammary cell lines derived from normal breast epithelium also showed CDH1 promoter methylation, a fibroblastic phenotype and expression profile. We suggest that CDH1 promoter methylation, but not mutational inactivation, is part of an entire programme, resulting in EMT and increased invasiveness in breast cancer. The molecular events that are part of this programme can be inferred from the differentially expressed genes and include genes from the TGFbeta pathway, transcription factors involved in CDH1 regulation (i.e. ZFHX1B, SNAI2, but not SNAI1, TWIST), annexins, AP1/2 transcription factors and members of the actin and intermediate filament cytoskeleton organisation.

Exposure to environmental contaminants, dietary factors and lifestyles may explain worldwide different breast cancer (BC) incidence. Inorganic arsenic (iAs) in the drinking water is a concern in many regions, such as northern Mexico. Studies in several countries have associated the proportion of urinary monomethylarsenic (%MMA) with increased risks for many As-related diseases, including cancer. To investigate the potential relationships between the risk of BC and the capacity to methylate iAs, a hospital-based case-control study (1016 cases/1028 controls) was performed in northern Mexico. Women were directly interviewed about their reproductive histories. The profile of As metabolites in urine was determined by HPLC-ICP-MS and methylation capacity was assessed by metabolite percentages and indexes. Total urinary As, excluding arsenobetaine (TAs-AsB), ranged from 0.26 to 303.29mug/L. Most women (86%) had TAs-AsB levels below As biological exposure index (35mug/L). Women with higher %MMA and/or primary methylation index (PMI) had an increased BC risk (%MMA ORQ5vs.Q1=2.63; 95%CI 1.89,3.66; p for trend <0.001; PMI ORQ5vs.Q1=1.90; 95%CI 1.39,2.59, p for trend <0.001). In contrast, women with higher proportion of urinary dimethylarsenic (%DMA) and/or secondary methylation index (SMI) had a reduced BC risk (%DMA ORQ5vs.Q1=0.63; 95%CI 0.45,0.87, p for trend 0.006; SMI ORQ5vsQ1=0.42, 95%CI 0.31,0.59, p for trend <0.001). Neither %iAs nor total methylation index was associated to BC risk. Inter-individual variations in iAs metabolism may play a role in BC carcinogenesis. Women with higher capacity to methylate iAs to MMA and/or a lower capacity to further methylate MMA to DMA were at higher BC risk.. Exposure to environmental contaminants, dietary factors and lifestyles may explain worldwide different breast cancer (BC) incidence. Inorganic arsenic (iAs) in the drinking water is a concern in many regions, such as northern Mexico. Studies in several countries have associated the proportion of urinary monomethylarsenic (%MMA) with increased risks for many As-related diseases, including cancer. To investigate the potential relationships between the risk of BC and the capacity to methylate iAs, a hospital-based case-control study (1016 cases/1028 controls) was performed in northern Mexico. Women were directly interviewed about their reproductive histories. The profile of As metabolites in urine was determined by HPLC-ICP-MS and methylation capacity was assessed by metabolite percentages and indexes. Total urinary As, excluding arsenobetaine (TAs-AsB), ranged from 0.26 to 303.29mug/L. Most women (86%) had TAs-AsB levels below As biological exposure index (35mug/L). Women with higher %MMA and/or primary methylation index (PMI) had an increased BC risk (%MMA ORQ5vs.Q1=2.63; 95%CI 1.89,3.66; p for trend <0.001; PMI ORQ5vs.Q1=1.90; 95%CI 1.39,2.59, p for trend <0.001). In contrast, women with higher proportion of urinary dimethylarsenic (%DMA) and/or secondary methylation index (SMI) had a reduced BC risk (%DMA ORQ5vs.Q1=0.63; 95%CI 0.45,0.87, p for trend 0.006; SMI ORQ5vsQ1=0.42, 95%CI 0.31,0.59, p for trend <0.001). Neither %iAs nor total methylation index was associated to BC risk. Inter-individual variations in iAs metabolism may play a role in BC carcinogenesis. Women with higher capacity to methylate iAs to MMA and/or a lower capacity to further methylate MMA to DMA were at higher BC risk.

Breast cancer specific gene 1 (BCSG1), also referred as synuclein gamma, is the third member of a neuronal protein family synuclein. BCSG1 is not expressed in normal breast tissues but highly expressed in advanced infiltrating breast carcinomas. When over expressed, BCSG1 significantly stimulates breast cancer metastasis. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the abnormal transcription of BCSG1 in breast cancer cells, in this study, we isolated a 2195 base pair fragment of human BCSG1 gene. This fragment includes 1 kb 5'-flanking region, exon 1, and intron 1. By analysing the promoter activity and the methylation status of the exon 1 region, we show that (1) Intron 1 plays critical roles in the control of BCSG1 gene transcription through cis-regulatory sequences that affect BCSG1 transcription in cell type-specific and cell type-nonspecific manners. (2) The activator protein-1 (AP-1) is functionally involved in BCSG1 transcription in breast cancer cells through its binding to an AP-1 motif located in the intron 1. (3) The exon 1 region of BCSG1 gene contains a CpG island that is unmethylated in BCSG1-positive SKBR-3 and T47D cells but densely methylated in BCSG1-negative MCF-7 cells. (4) Treating MCF-7 cells with a demethylating agent 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine specifically activated BCSG1 transcription. Thus, our results suggest that while the cellular content of transcription activators and repressors that interact with the cis-regulatory sequences present in the intron 1 contribute prominently to the tissue-specific expression of BCSG1, demethylation of exon 1 is an important factor responsible for the aberrant expression of BCSG1 in breast carcinomas.. Breast cancer specific gene 1 (BCSG1), also referred as synuclein gamma, is the third member of a neuronal protein family synuclein. BCSG1 is not expressed in normal breast tissues but highly expressed in advanced infiltrating breast carcinomas. When over expressed, BCSG1 significantly stimulates breast cancer metastasis. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the abnormal transcription of BCSG1 in breast cancer cells, in this study, we isolated a 2195 base pair fragment of human BCSG1 gene. This fragment includes 1 kb 5'-flanking region, exon 1, and intron 1. By analysing the promoter activity and the methylation status of the exon 1 region, we show that (1) Intron 1 plays critical roles in the control of BCSG1 gene transcription through cis-regulatory sequences that affect BCSG1 transcription in cell type-specific and cell type-nonspecific manners. (2) The activator protein-1 (AP-1) is functionally involved in BCSG1 transcription in breast cancer cells through its binding to an AP-1 motif located in the intron 1. (3) The exon 1 region of BCSG1 gene contains a CpG island that is unmethylated in BCSG1-positive SKBR-3 and T47D cells but densely methylated in BCSG1-negative MCF-7 cells. (4) Treating MCF-7 cells with a demethylating agent 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine specifically activated BCSG1 transcription. Thus, our results suggest that while the cellular content of transcription activators and repressors that interact with the cis-regulatory sequences present in the intron 1 contribute prominently to the tissue-specific expression of BCSG1, demethylation of exon 1 is an important factor responsible for the aberrant expression of BCSG1 in breast carcinomas.

Large noncoding RNA HOTAIR, transcribed from the antisense strand of HOXC12, interacts with Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) in the regulation of gene activities. Recent work suggests that it may have effects on breast cancer progression and survival. We evaluated HOTAIR expression and the methylation status of its downstream intergenic CpG island in primary breast cancers, and examined associations of these factors with clinical and pathologic features and patient survival. HOTAIR expression and DNA methylation were analyzed in tissue from 348 primary breast cancers with quantitative RT-PCR and methylation-specific PCR, respectively. HOTAIR expression and methylation varied widely in the tissues. A positive correlation was found between DNA methylation and HOTAIR expression. Methylation was associated with unfavorable disease characteristics, whereas no significant associations were found between HOTAIR expression and clinical or pathologic features. In multivariate, but not in univariate, Cox proportional hazard regression models, patients with high HOTAIR expression had lower risks of relapse and mortality than those with low HOTAIR expression. These findings suggest that the intergenic DNA methylation may have important biologic relevance in regulating HOTAIR expression, and that HOTAIR expression may not be an independent prognostic marker in breast cancer, but needs further validation in independent studies.. Large noncoding RNA HOTAIR, transcribed from the antisense strand of HOXC12, interacts with Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) in the regulation of gene activities. Recent work suggests that it may have effects on breast cancer progression and survival. We evaluated HOTAIR expression and the methylation status of its downstream intergenic CpG island in primary breast cancers, and examined associations of these factors with clinical and pathologic features and patient survival. HOTAIR expression and DNA methylation were analyzed in tissue from 348 primary breast cancers with quantitative RT-PCR and methylation-specific PCR, respectively. HOTAIR expression and methylation varied widely in the tissues. A positive correlation was found between DNA methylation and HOTAIR expression. Methylation was associated with unfavorable disease characteristics, whereas no significant associations were found between HOTAIR expression and clinical or pathologic features. In multivariate, but not in univariate, Cox proportional hazard regression models, patients with high HOTAIR expression had lower risks of relapse and mortality than those with low HOTAIR expression. These findings suggest that the intergenic DNA methylation may have important biologic relevance in regulating HOTAIR expression, and that HOTAIR expression may not be an independent prognostic marker in breast cancer, but needs further validation in independent studies.

The downregulation of tight junction protein CLDN6 promotes breast cancer cell migration and invasion; however, the exact mechanism underlying CLDN6 downregulation remains unclear. CLDN6 silence is associated with DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) mediated DNA methylation, and DNMT1 is regulated by the transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)/SMAD pathway. Therefore, we hypothesized that TGFbeta/SMAD pathway, specifically SMAD2, may play a critical role for CLDN6 downregulation through DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) mediated DNA methylation. To test this hypothesis, we blocked the SMAD2 pathway with SB431542 in two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and SKBR-3). Our results showed that treatment with SB431542 led to a decrease of DNMT1 expression and the binding activity for CLDN6 promoter. The methylation level of CLDN6 promoter was decreased, and simultaneously CLDN6 protein expression increased. Upregulation of CLDN6 inhibited epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and reduced the migration and invasion ability of both MCF-7 and SKBR-3 cells. Furthermore, knocked down of CLDN6 abolished SB431542 effects on suppression of EMT associated gene expression and inhibition of migration and invasion. Thus, we demonstrated that the downregulation of CLDN6 is regulated through promoter methylation by DNMT1, which depends on the SMAD2 pathway, and that CLDN6 is a key regulator in the SMAD2/DNMT1/CLDN6 pathway to inhibit EMT, migration and invasion of breast cancer cells.. The downregulation of tight junction protein CLDN6 promotes breast cancer cell migration and invasion; however, the exact mechanism underlying CLDN6 downregulation remains unclear. CLDN6 silence is associated with DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) mediated DNA methylation, and DNMT1 is regulated by the transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)/SMAD pathway. Therefore, we hypothesized that TGFbeta/SMAD pathway, specifically SMAD2, may play a critical role for CLDN6 downregulation through DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) mediated DNA methylation. To test this hypothesis, we blocked the SMAD2 pathway with SB431542 in two human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7 and SKBR-3). Our results showed that treatment with SB431542 led to a decrease of DNMT1 expression and the binding activity for CLDN6 promoter. The methylation level of CLDN6 promoter was decreased, and simultaneously CLDN6 protein expression increased. Upregulation of CLDN6 inhibited epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and reduced the migration and invasion ability of both MCF-7 and SKBR-3 cells. Furthermore, knocked down of CLDN6 abolished SB431542 effects on suppression of EMT associated gene expression and inhibition of migration and invasion. Thus, we demonstrated that the downregulation of CLDN6 is regulated through promoter methylation by DNMT1, which depends on the SMAD2 pathway, and that CLDN6 is a key regulator in the SMAD2/DNMT1/CLDN6 pathway to inhibit EMT, migration and invasion of breast cancer cells.

DNA hypomethylation was previously implicated in cancer progression and metastasis. The purpose of this study was to examine whether stilbenoids, resveratrol and pterostilbene thought to exert anticancer effects, target genes with oncogenic function for de novo methylation and silencing, leading to inactivation of related signaling pathways. Following Illumina 450K, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis reveals that stilbenoids alter DNA methylation patterns in breast cancer cells. On average, 75% of differentially methylated genes have increased methylation, and these genes are enriched for oncogenic functions, including NOTCH signaling pathway. MAML2, a coactivator of NOTCH targets, is methylated at the enhancer region and transcriptionally silenced in response to stilbenoids, possibly explaining the downregulation of NOTCH target genes. The increased DNA methylation at MAML2 enhancer coincides with increased occupancy of repressive histone marks and decrease in activating marks. This condensed chromatin structure is associated with binding of DNMT3B and decreased occupancy of OCT1 transcription factor at MAML2 enhancer, suggesting a role of DNMT3B in increasing methylation of MAML2 after stilbenoid treatment. Our results deliver a novel insight into epigenetic regulation of oncogenic signals in cancer and provide support for epigenetic-targeting strategies as an effective anticancer approach.. DNA hypomethylation was previously implicated in cancer progression and metastasis. The purpose of this study was to examine whether stilbenoids, resveratrol and pterostilbene thought to exert anticancer effects, target genes with oncogenic function for de novo methylation and silencing, leading to inactivation of related signaling pathways. Following Illumina 450K, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis reveals that stilbenoids alter DNA methylation patterns in breast cancer cells. On average, 75% of differentially methylated genes have increased methylation, and these genes are enriched for oncogenic functions, including NOTCH signaling pathway. MAML2, a coactivator of NOTCH targets, is methylated at the enhancer region and transcriptionally silenced in response to stilbenoids, possibly explaining the downregulation of NOTCH target genes. The increased DNA methylation at MAML2 enhancer coincides with increased occupancy of repressive histone marks and decrease in activating marks. This condensed chromatin structure is associated with binding of DNMT3B and decreased occupancy of OCT1 transcription factor at MAML2 enhancer, suggesting a role of DNMT3B in increasing methylation of MAML2 after stilbenoid treatment. Our results deliver a novel insight into epigenetic regulation of oncogenic signals in cancer and provide support for epigenetic-targeting strategies as an effective anticancer approach.

Clofarabine (2-chloro-2'-fluoro-2'-deoxyarabinosyladenine, ClF) is a second-generation 2'-deoxyadenosine analogue that is structurally related to cladribine (2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine, 2CdA) and fludarabine (9-beta-d-arabinosyl-2-fluoroadenine, F-ara-A). It demonstrates potent antitumour activity at much lower doses than parent compounds with high therapeutic efficacy in paediatric blood cancers. Our previous studies in breast cancer cells indicate that 2CdA and F-ara-A are involved in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. We therefore investigated whether ClF influences methylation and expression of selected tumour suppressor genes, such as adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN), and retinoic acid receptor beta 2 (RARbeta2), as well as expression of p53, p21 and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines with different invasive potential. Promoter methylation and gene expression were estimated using methylation-sensitive restriction analysis (MSRA) and real-time PCR, respectively. ClF demonstrated potent growth inhibitory activity in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells after 96h treatment with IC50 determined as equal to 640nM and 50nM, respectively. In both breast cancer cell lines, ClF led to hypomethylation and up-regulation of APC, PTEN and RARbeta2 as well as increase in p21 expression. Only in non-invasive MCF-7 cells, these changes were associated with down-regulation of DNMT1. Our results provide first evidence of ClF implications in epigenetic regulation of transcriptional activity of selected tumour suppressor genes in breast cancer. It seems to be a new important element of ClF anticancer activity and may indicate its potential efficacy in epigenetic therapy of solid tumours, especially at early stages of carcinogenesis.. Clofarabine (2-chloro-2'-fluoro-2'-deoxyarabinosyladenine, ClF) is a second-generation 2'-deoxyadenosine analogue that is structurally related to cladribine (2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine, 2CdA) and fludarabine (9-beta-d-arabinosyl-2-fluoroadenine, F-ara-A). It demonstrates potent antitumour activity at much lower doses than parent compounds with high therapeutic efficacy in paediatric blood cancers. Our previous studies in breast cancer cells indicate that 2CdA and F-ara-A are involved in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. We therefore investigated whether ClF influences methylation and expression of selected tumour suppressor genes, such as adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN), and retinoic acid receptor beta 2 (RARbeta2), as well as expression of p53, p21 and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines with different invasive potential. Promoter methylation and gene expression were estimated using methylation-sensitive restriction analysis (MSRA) and real-time PCR, respectively. ClF demonstrated potent growth inhibitory activity in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells after 96h treatment with IC50 determined as equal to 640nM and 50nM, respectively. In both breast cancer cell lines, ClF led to hypomethylation and up-regulation of APC, PTEN and RARbeta2 as well as increase in p21 expression. Only in non-invasive MCF-7 cells, these changes were associated with down-regulation of DNMT1. Our results provide first evidence of ClF implications in epigenetic regulation of transcriptional activity of selected tumour suppressor genes in breast cancer. It seems to be a new important element of ClF anticancer activity and may indicate its potential efficacy in epigenetic therapy of solid tumours, especially at early stages of carcinogenesis.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Sporadic breast cancer is frequently associated with aberrant DNA methylation patterns that are reversible and responsive to environmental factors, including diet. In the present study, we investigated the effects of sulforaphane (SFN), a phytochemical from cruciferous vegetables, on the methylation and expression of PTEN and RARbeta2 tumour suppressor genes as well as on the expression of regulators of DNA methylation reaction, DNMT1 , p53 , and p21 , in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells with different invasive potential. We also evaluate the role of SFN epigenetic effects in support of therapy with clofarabine (ClF) that was recently shown to modulate the epigenome as well. METHODS: Promoter methylation and gene expression were estimated using methylation-sensitive restriction analysis and real-time PCR, respectively. RESULTS: In both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, SFN at IC 50 (22 and 46 mu M , respectively) and a physiologically relevant 10 mu M concentration lead to hypomethylation of PTEN and RARbeta2 promoters with concomitant gene upregulation. The combination of SFN and ClF enhances these effects, resulting in an increase in cell growth arrest and apoptosis at a non-invasive breast cancer stage. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide evidence that SFN activates DNA methylation-silenced tumour suppressor genes in breast cancer cells and may contribute to SFN-mediated support of therapy with an anti-cancer drug, ClF, increasing its applications in solid tumours.. BACKGROUND/AIM: Sporadic breast cancer is frequently associated with aberrant DNA methylation patterns that are reversible and responsive to environmental factors, including diet. In the present study, we investigated the effects of sulforaphane (SFN), a phytochemical from cruciferous vegetables, on the methylation and expression of PTEN and RARbeta2 tumour suppressor genes as well as on the expression of regulators of DNA methylation reaction, DNMT1 , p53 , and p21 , in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells with different invasive potential. We also evaluate the role of SFN epigenetic effects in support of therapy with clofarabine (ClF) that was recently shown to modulate the epigenome as well. METHODS: Promoter methylation and gene expression were estimated using methylation-sensitive restriction analysis and real-time PCR, respectively. RESULTS: In both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells, SFN at IC 50 (22 and 46 mu M , respectively) and a physiologically relevant 10 mu M concentration lead to hypomethylation of PTEN and RARbeta2 promoters with concomitant gene upregulation. The combination of SFN and ClF enhances these effects, resulting in an increase in cell growth arrest and apoptosis at a non-invasive breast cancer stage. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide evidence that SFN activates DNA methylation-silenced tumour suppressor genes in breast cancer cells and may contribute to SFN-mediated support of therapy with an anti-cancer drug, ClF, increasing its applications in solid tumours.

Folate, one of the most studied dietary compounds, has recently become the main topic of debates on food fortification. Although low folate levels may be associated with increased risk of cancer development, simultaneously several reports indicate a detrimental effects mediated by high folate concentrations. Using the methylation sensitive restriction analysis (MSRA) and real-time RT-PCR we tested the effect of folic acid on DNA promoter methylation and expression of PTEN, APC and RARbeta2 tumour suppressor genes in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines with different invasive capacity. The tested genes encode proteins involved in regulation of oncogenic intracellular signaling pathways. The results show that the increasing concentrations of folic acid lead to a dose-dependent down-regulation of tumour suppressor genes which may be linked to the increased DNA methylation detected within their promoter regions. The effects were more remarkable in non-invasive MCF-7 cells where we also observed 30% up-regulation of DNMT1 expression at the highest folate concentration used. Our findings show that caution need to be used when introducing folic acid supplementation since it may lead to cancer progression.. Folate, one of the most studied dietary compounds, has recently become the main topic of debates on food fortification. Although low folate levels may be associated with increased risk of cancer development, simultaneously several reports indicate a detrimental effects mediated by high folate concentrations. Using the methylation sensitive restriction analysis (MSRA) and real-time RT-PCR we tested the effect of folic acid on DNA promoter methylation and expression of PTEN, APC and RARbeta2 tumour suppressor genes in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines with different invasive capacity. The tested genes encode proteins involved in regulation of oncogenic intracellular signaling pathways. The results show that the increasing concentrations of folic acid lead to a dose-dependent down-regulation of tumour suppressor genes which may be linked to the increased DNA methylation detected within their promoter regions. The effects were more remarkable in non-invasive MCF-7 cells where we also observed 30% up-regulation of DNMT1 expression at the highest folate concentration used. Our findings show that caution need to be used when introducing folic acid supplementation since it may lead to cancer progression.

To study the relation of 14-3-3 sigma gene promoter hypermethylation and its transcription expression levels in sporadic breast carcinogenesis. Methylation of 14-3-3 sigma gene was detected by sensitive MSP assay in carcinous, non-cancerous, and normal tissue, and its mRNA was also detected by real time PCR based on SYBR Green 1 as well, and protein was detected by west blotting assay. The methylation frequencies of 14-3-3 sigma were 90% in 68 cases of sporadic breast cancer patients. Methylation was presented in portions (2/13, 18%) of hyperplastic samples, and no hypermethylation was presented in normal tissue. The methylation change of 14-3-3 sigma gene was markedly related with various types, grades, and lymph node metastases (P < 0.05), and no significant differences in methylation frequencies were seen between premenopause and postmenopause (P > 0.05). The methylation of 14-3-3 sigma shows reverse relation with its mRNA transcription and expression level (P < 0.05). Only was lymph node metastases strongly associated with poor outcome (P = 0.02). Whether 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation or not did not affect the 5 years survival rate of sporadic breast cancer patients (P > 0.05). Epigenetics alterations of the 14-3-3 sigma can contribute to reducing or losing expression of 14-3-3 sigma protein, which play an important role in the development of sporadic breast carcinomas and involved in various types, grades, and lymph node metastases. Otherwise, node metastases of breast carcinogenesis patients are strongly associated with poor outcome.. To study the relation of 14-3-3 sigma gene promoter hypermethylation and its transcription expression levels in sporadic breast carcinogenesis. Methylation of 14-3-3 sigma gene was detected by sensitive MSP assay in carcinous, non-cancerous, and normal tissue, and its mRNA was also detected by real time PCR based on SYBR Green 1 as well, and protein was detected by west blotting assay. The methylation frequencies of 14-3-3 sigma were 90% in 68 cases of sporadic breast cancer patients. Methylation was presented in portions (2/13, 18%) of hyperplastic samples, and no hypermethylation was presented in normal tissue. The methylation change of 14-3-3 sigma gene was markedly related with various types, grades, and lymph node metastases (P < 0.05), and no significant differences in methylation frequencies were seen between premenopause and postmenopause (P > 0.05). The methylation of 14-3-3 sigma shows reverse relation with its mRNA transcription and expression level (P < 0.05). Only was lymph node metastases strongly associated with poor outcome (P = 0.02). Whether 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation or not did not affect the 5 years survival rate of sporadic breast cancer patients (P > 0.05). Epigenetics alterations of the 14-3-3 sigma can contribute to reducing or losing expression of 14-3-3 sigma protein, which play an important role in the development of sporadic breast carcinomas and involved in various types, grades, and lymph node metastases. Otherwise, node metastases of breast carcinogenesis patients are strongly associated with poor outcome.

Objective: To explore the effect of peripheral blood genomic DNA methylation on the relationship between methyl donor status and risk of breast cancer. Methods: A case-control study was conducted. Each three hundred breast cancer cases and controls were consecutively recruited. Food frequency questionnaire was used to collect dietary information. Amounts on folate, methionine, choline and betaine intake were calculated. Blood samples were collected for DNA extraction. Peripheral blood genomic DNA methylation was measured by using the Methyl Flash(TM) Methylated DNA Quantification Kit. Pathway analysis was used to examine the effect of genomic DNA methylation on the relations between methyl donor status and risk of breast cancer. Results: The genome DNA methylation rates were 0.46%+/-0.25% and 0.53%+/-0.34%, respectively on both cases and controls, with differences statistically significant (P<0.01). Results from the pathway analysis, results showed that methionine consumption was related to genomic DNA methylation (beta=0.065, P<0.05) while genomic DNA methylation was related to the risk of breast cancerk (beta=-0.027, P<0.05), respectively. Conclusions: The level of peripheral blood genomic DNA methylation in breast cancer cases was significantly lower than that in the controls. Genomic DNA methylation seemed to have played a mediated role between methionine and the risk of breast cancer.. Objective: To explore the effect of peripheral blood genomic DNA methylation on the relationship between methyl donor status and risk of breast cancer. Methods: A case-control study was conducted. Each three hundred breast cancer cases and controls were consecutively recruited. Food frequency questionnaire was used to collect dietary information. Amounts on folate, methionine, choline and betaine intake were calculated. Blood samples were collected for DNA extraction. Peripheral blood genomic DNA methylation was measured by using the Methyl Flash(TM) Methylated DNA Quantification Kit. Pathway analysis was used to examine the effect of genomic DNA methylation on the relations between methyl donor status and risk of breast cancer. Results: The genome DNA methylation rates were 0.46%+/-0.25% and 0.53%+/-0.34%, respectively on both cases and controls, with differences statistically significant (P<0.01). Results from the pathway analysis, results showed that methionine consumption was related to genomic DNA methylation (beta=0.065, P<0.05) while genomic DNA methylation was related to the risk of breast cancerk (beta=-0.027, P<0.05), respectively. Conclusions: The level of peripheral blood genomic DNA methylation in breast cancer cases was significantly lower than that in the controls. Genomic DNA methylation seemed to have played a mediated role between methionine and the risk of breast cancer.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 8 is encoded by a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene (IRF8), its promotor is frequently methylated in multiple cancers. However, the promoter methylation status, functions and underlying mechanisms of IRF8 in breast cancer remain unclear. We found that IRF8 was downregulated in breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors, compared with normal breast tissues, mainly because of aberrant promoter methylation. However, its expression was not associated with pathological characteristics. Restoration of IRF8 expression suppressed cell proliferation, colony formation, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation, cell migration and invasion, and induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in vitro. IRF8 also inhibited xenograft growth in nude mice in vivo. Competition with IRF8 function by IRF8 mutant (K79E) enhanced cell migration and invasion in 4T1 murine cells in vitro. Importantly, IRF8, as both downstream target gene and regulator of IFN-gamma/STAT1 signaling, inhibited canonical beta-catenin signaling. These findings identify IRF8 as a novel tumor suppressor regulating IFN-gamma/STAT1 signaling and beta-catenin signaling in breast cancer.. Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 8 is encoded by a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene (IRF8), its promotor is frequently methylated in multiple cancers. However, the promoter methylation status, functions and underlying mechanisms of IRF8 in breast cancer remain unclear. We found that IRF8 was downregulated in breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors, compared with normal breast tissues, mainly because of aberrant promoter methylation. However, its expression was not associated with pathological characteristics. Restoration of IRF8 expression suppressed cell proliferation, colony formation, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation, cell migration and invasion, and induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in vitro. IRF8 also inhibited xenograft growth in nude mice in vivo. Competition with IRF8 function by IRF8 mutant (K79E) enhanced cell migration and invasion in 4T1 murine cells in vitro. Importantly, IRF8, as both downstream target gene and regulator of IFN-gamma/STAT1 signaling, inhibited canonical beta-catenin signaling. These findings identify IRF8 as a novel tumor suppressor regulating IFN-gamma/STAT1 signaling and beta-catenin signaling in breast cancer.

Chemoresistant tumors often fail to respond to other cytotoxic treatments such as radiation therapy. The mechanisms of chemo- and radiotherapy cross resistance are not fully understood and are believed to be epigenetic in nature. We hypothesize that MCF-7 cells and their doxorubicin-resistant variant MCF-7/DOX cells may exhibit different responses to ionizing radiation due to their dissimilar epigenetic status. Similar to previous studies, we found that MCF-7/DOX cells harbor much lower levels of global DNA methylation than MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, we found that MCF-7/DOX cells had lower background apoptosis levels and were less responsive to radiation than MCF-7 cells. Decreased radiation responsiveness correlated to significant global DNA hypomethylation in MCF-7/DOX cells. Here, for the first time, we show that the radiation resistance of MCF-7/DOX cells can be reversed by an epigenetic treatment--the application of methyl-donor SAM. SAM-mediated reversal of DNA methylation led to elevated radiation sensitivity in MCF-7/DOX cells. Contrarily, application of SAM on the radiation sensitive and higher methylated MCF-7 cells resulted in a decrease in their radiation responsiveness. This data suggests that a fine balance of DNA methylation is needed to insure proper radiation and drug responsiveness.. Chemoresistant tumors often fail to respond to other cytotoxic treatments such as radiation therapy. The mechanisms of chemo- and radiotherapy cross resistance are not fully understood and are believed to be epigenetic in nature. We hypothesize that MCF-7 cells and their doxorubicin-resistant variant MCF-7/DOX cells may exhibit different responses to ionizing radiation due to their dissimilar epigenetic status. Similar to previous studies, we found that MCF-7/DOX cells harbor much lower levels of global DNA methylation than MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, we found that MCF-7/DOX cells had lower background apoptosis levels and were less responsive to radiation than MCF-7 cells. Decreased radiation responsiveness correlated to significant global DNA hypomethylation in MCF-7/DOX cells. Here, for the first time, we show that the radiation resistance of MCF-7/DOX cells can be reversed by an epigenetic treatment--the application of methyl-donor SAM. SAM-mediated reversal of DNA methylation led to elevated radiation sensitivity in MCF-7/DOX cells. Contrarily, application of SAM on the radiation sensitive and higher methylated MCF-7 cells resulted in a decrease in their radiation responsiveness. This data suggests that a fine balance of DNA methylation is needed to insure proper radiation and drug responsiveness.

INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of cyclooxygenase (COX-2) is commonly observed in human cancers. In a murine model of metastatic breast cancer, we observed that COX-2 expression and enzyme activity were associated with enhanced tumorigenic and metastatic potential. In contrast to the high COX-2 expression in metastatic tumors, transplantation of poorly tumorigenic tumor cell lines to syngeneic mice results in less COX-2 expression and less COX-2 activity in vivo. Aberrant CpG island methylation, and subsequent silencing of the COX-2 promoter, has been observed in human cancer cell lines and in some human tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. METHODS: Using bisulfite modification and a methylation-specific PCR, we examined the methylation status of the COX-2 promoter in a series of four closely-related murine mammary tumors differing in COX-2 expression and metastatic potential. RESULTS: We showed that line 410, which does not express COX-2 in vivo, exhibited evidence of promoter methylation. Interestingly, the metastatic counterpart of this cell (line 410.4) displayed only the unmethylated COX-2 promoter, as did two additional cell lines (lines 66.1 and 67). The methylation patterns observed in vitro were maintained when these murine mammary tumor lines were transplanted to syngeneic mice. Treatment with the DNA demethylating agent 5-aza-deoxycytidine increased COX-2 mRNA, increased protein and increased enzyme activity (prostaglandin synthesis). CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that COX-2 promoter methylation may be one mechanism by which tumor cells regulate COX-2 expression. Upregulation of COX-2 expression in closely related metastatic lesions versus nonmetastatic lesions may represent a shift towards the unmethylated phenotype.. INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of cyclooxygenase (COX-2) is commonly observed in human cancers. In a murine model of metastatic breast cancer, we observed that COX-2 expression and enzyme activity were associated with enhanced tumorigenic and metastatic potential. In contrast to the high COX-2 expression in metastatic tumors, transplantation of poorly tumorigenic tumor cell lines to syngeneic mice results in less COX-2 expression and less COX-2 activity in vivo. Aberrant CpG island methylation, and subsequent silencing of the COX-2 promoter, has been observed in human cancer cell lines and in some human tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. METHODS: Using bisulfite modification and a methylation-specific PCR, we examined the methylation status of the COX-2 promoter in a series of four closely-related murine mammary tumors differing in COX-2 expression and metastatic potential. RESULTS: We showed that line 410, which does not express COX-2 in vivo, exhibited evidence of promoter methylation. Interestingly, the metastatic counterpart of this cell (line 410.4) displayed only the unmethylated COX-2 promoter, as did two additional cell lines (lines 66.1 and 67). The methylation patterns observed in vitro were maintained when these murine mammary tumor lines were transplanted to syngeneic mice. Treatment with the DNA demethylating agent 5-aza-deoxycytidine increased COX-2 mRNA, increased protein and increased enzyme activity (prostaglandin synthesis). CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that COX-2 promoter methylation may be one mechanism by which tumor cells regulate COX-2 expression. Upregulation of COX-2 expression in closely related metastatic lesions versus nonmetastatic lesions may represent a shift towards the unmethylated phenotype.

Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 (CHD5) has been identified as a tumor suppressor in mouse models. Downregulation of CHD5 gene expression is frequently observed in breast cancer cells and tissues. This may be explained by deletions or other mutations; however, alternative mechanisms require investigation. Therefore, the present study evaluated whether CHD5 aberrant methylation has a role in primary breast tumors. A total of 389 patients with primary breast cancer (including 252 paraffin-embedded specimens and 137 fresh-frozen samples) were enrolled in the present study. In the current study, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and nested-methylation-specific PCR were used to analyze the mRNA expression and promoter methylation of CHD5 genes in a large cohort of breast cancer patients, and to investigate their associations with the clinicopathological features of tumors. CHD5 expression was significantly suppressed in breast cancer tissues compared with normal breast tissues when analyzed by RT-PCR. Furthermore, DNA methylation of CHD5 was more prevalent in breast tumors than in normal tissues. CHD5 mRNA levels correlated with the degree of CHD5 methylation in breast cancer tissues. Clinicopathological correlation analysis revealed that CHD5 promoter methylation was associated with estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status. Thus, downregulation of CHD5, mediated by abnormal methylation, may contribute to the development and progression of breast cancer.. Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 (CHD5) has been identified as a tumor suppressor in mouse models. Downregulation of CHD5 gene expression is frequently observed in breast cancer cells and tissues. This may be explained by deletions or other mutations; however, alternative mechanisms require investigation. Therefore, the present study evaluated whether CHD5 aberrant methylation has a role in primary breast tumors. A total of 389 patients with primary breast cancer (including 252 paraffin-embedded specimens and 137 fresh-frozen samples) were enrolled in the present study. In the current study, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and nested-methylation-specific PCR were used to analyze the mRNA expression and promoter methylation of CHD5 genes in a large cohort of breast cancer patients, and to investigate their associations with the clinicopathological features of tumors. CHD5 expression was significantly suppressed in breast cancer tissues compared with normal breast tissues when analyzed by RT-PCR. Furthermore, DNA methylation of CHD5 was more prevalent in breast tumors than in normal tissues. CHD5 mRNA levels correlated with the degree of CHD5 methylation in breast cancer tissues. Clinicopathological correlation analysis revealed that CHD5 promoter methylation was associated with estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status. Thus, downregulation of CHD5, mediated by abnormal methylation, may contribute to the development and progression of breast cancer.

Germ-line alterations of BRCA1 are responsible for about 50% of familial breast cancers. Although its biological function(s) has not yet been fully determined, it has been suggested that it may act as a tumor suppressor gene in breast and ovarian cancers. In sporadic breast cancers alterations of BRCA1 have not been detected and in vitro experiments have indicated that BRCA1 negatively regulates cellular proliferation. The present study was designed to identify and quantify, the BRCA1 mRNA levels, in normal and neoplasic human breast tissue. BRCA1 mRNA molecules were quantified using competitive reverse transcriptase PCR assays. DNA methylation patterns of this gene have been analysed by Southern blot experiments using methylation sensitive restriction enzymes. We found that BRCA1 mRNA levels were significantly lower in sporadic breast cancers (37 cases analysed, 24 cases of invasive ductal carcinomas not otherwise specified (NOS), two lobular carcinomas in situ two medullary carcinomas, four invasive lobular carcinomas, two invasive mucinous carcinomas and three invasive ductal carcinomas with predominantly in situ component) compared with normal breast tissues (P=0.0003). This down-regulation of BRCA1 is observed in all histologic types analysed. In invasive ductal carcinomas NOS, this down-regulation does not correlate with any of the prognostic factors studied (tumor size, node status, histologic grade, hormone receptor status). In the samples analysed, alterations of DNA methylation patterns were not dectected in the vicinity of the major transcription start site. These data suggest the involvement of BRCA1 in the carcinogenesis of these histologic types.. Germ-line alterations of BRCA1 are responsible for about 50% of familial breast cancers. Although its biological function(s) has not yet been fully determined, it has been suggested that it may act as a tumor suppressor gene in breast and ovarian cancers. In sporadic breast cancers alterations of BRCA1 have not been detected and in vitro experiments have indicated that BRCA1 negatively regulates cellular proliferation. The present study was designed to identify and quantify, the BRCA1 mRNA levels, in normal and neoplasic human breast tissue. BRCA1 mRNA molecules were quantified using competitive reverse transcriptase PCR assays. DNA methylation patterns of this gene have been analysed by Southern blot experiments using methylation sensitive restriction enzymes. We found that BRCA1 mRNA levels were significantly lower in sporadic breast cancers (37 cases analysed, 24 cases of invasive ductal carcinomas not otherwise specified (NOS), two lobular carcinomas in situ two medullary carcinomas, four invasive lobular carcinomas, two invasive mucinous carcinomas and three invasive ductal carcinomas with predominantly in situ component) compared with normal breast tissues (P=0.0003). This down-regulation of BRCA1 is observed in all histologic types analysed. In invasive ductal carcinomas NOS, this down-regulation does not correlate with any of the prognostic factors studied (tumor size, node status, histologic grade, hormone receptor status). In the samples analysed, alterations of DNA methylation patterns were not dectected in the vicinity of the major transcription start site. These data suggest the involvement of BRCA1 in the carcinogenesis of these histologic types.

Over the last few decades, a wealth of treatment options have become available for breast cancer. To specifically direct those therapies to patients with the highest need who will receive the greatest benefit, biomarkers are urgently needed. Two specific needs seem to be most pressing: first is the need for prognostic markers, which would determine which group of patients may recover without adjuvant chemotherapy. Second, predictive markers for specific treatments, such as different endocrine treatments, chemotherapies or targeted drugs, are expected to play a major role in the near future. Ideally, such markers should be strong single markers, or low-complexity marker panels containing only a few markers, to allow for easier assay development and improved reproducibility. The possibility to measure the marker(s) in formalin-fixed specimens would greatly facilitate integration into routine clinical practice. A common and early event in breast cancer is aberrant DNA methylation within gene regulatory regions, affecting a variety of genes with different functions. Data from recently published studies indicate that altered DNA methylation carries prognostic as well as predictive information in breast cancer. Together with the technical advantages of a DNA-based marker, DNA methylation may well constitute the ideal biomarker to further individualize breast cancer treatment. Here the recent literature is reviewed and the most interesting markers, which have the potential to significantly change breast cancer treatment and, therefore, warrant further systematic clinical validation, are highlighted.. Over the last few decades, a wealth of treatment options have become available for breast cancer. To specifically direct those therapies to patients with the highest need who will receive the greatest benefit, biomarkers are urgently needed. Two specific needs seem to be most pressing: first is the need for prognostic markers, which would determine which group of patients may recover without adjuvant chemotherapy. Second, predictive markers for specific treatments, such as different endocrine treatments, chemotherapies or targeted drugs, are expected to play a major role in the near future. Ideally, such markers should be strong single markers, or low-complexity marker panels containing only a few markers, to allow for easier assay development and improved reproducibility. The possibility to measure the marker(s) in formalin-fixed specimens would greatly facilitate integration into routine clinical practice. A common and early event in breast cancer is aberrant DNA methylation within gene regulatory regions, affecting a variety of genes with different functions. Data from recently published studies indicate that altered DNA methylation carries prognostic as well as predictive information in breast cancer. Together with the technical advantages of a DNA-based marker, DNA methylation may well constitute the ideal biomarker to further individualize breast cancer treatment. Here the recent literature is reviewed and the most interesting markers, which have the potential to significantly change breast cancer treatment and, therefore, warrant further systematic clinical validation, are highlighted.

Our aim was to identify and validate DNA-methylation markers associated with very good outcome in node negative, hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients after adjuvant endocrine therapy which might allow identifying patients who could be spared the burden of adjuvant chemotherapy. Using a methylation microarray, we analysed 117 candidate genes in hormone receptor-positive tumours from 109 breast cancer patients treated by adjuvant tamoxifen. Results were validated in an independent cohort (n=236, 5 centres). Independent methodological validation was achieved by a real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based technique. DNA methylation of PITX2 showed the strongest correlation with distant recurrence. Its impact on patient outcome was validated in the independent cohort: 86% of patients with low PITX2 methylation were metastasis-free after 10 years, compared to 69% with elevated PITX2 methylation. Moreover, PITX2 methylation added significant independent information to established clinical factors. All clinical and technical findings were confirmed by quantitative DNA-methylation PCR. These results provide strong evidence that DNA-methylation analysis allows clinically relevant risk assessment in tamoxifen-treated primary breast cancer. Based on PITX2 methylation, about half of hormone receptor-positive, node-negative breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy can be considered low-risk regarding development of distant recurrences and may thus be spared adjuvant chemotherapy. In addition, these low-risk postmenopausal patients seem to respond sufficiently well to tamoxifen so that they may not require up-front aromatase inhibitor therapy.. Our aim was to identify and validate DNA-methylation markers associated with very good outcome in node negative, hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients after adjuvant endocrine therapy which might allow identifying patients who could be spared the burden of adjuvant chemotherapy. Using a methylation microarray, we analysed 117 candidate genes in hormone receptor-positive tumours from 109 breast cancer patients treated by adjuvant tamoxifen. Results were validated in an independent cohort (n=236, 5 centres). Independent methodological validation was achieved by a real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based technique. DNA methylation of PITX2 showed the strongest correlation with distant recurrence. Its impact on patient outcome was validated in the independent cohort: 86% of patients with low PITX2 methylation were metastasis-free after 10 years, compared to 69% with elevated PITX2 methylation. Moreover, PITX2 methylation added significant independent information to established clinical factors. All clinical and technical findings were confirmed by quantitative DNA-methylation PCR. These results provide strong evidence that DNA-methylation analysis allows clinically relevant risk assessment in tamoxifen-treated primary breast cancer. Based on PITX2 methylation, about half of hormone receptor-positive, node-negative breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy can be considered low-risk regarding development of distant recurrences and may thus be spared adjuvant chemotherapy. In addition, these low-risk postmenopausal patients seem to respond sufficiently well to tamoxifen so that they may not require up-front aromatase inhibitor therapy.

Tumours presenting BRCAness profile behave more aggressively and are more invasive as a consequence of their complex genetic and epigenetic alterations, caused by impaired fidelity of the DNA repair processes. Methylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative mechanism to inactivate DNA repair and tumour suppressor genes. In our study, we analyzed the frequency of methylation changes of 24 tumour suppressor genes and explored their association with BRCAness profile. BRCA1ness profile and aberrant methylation were studied in 233 fresh frozen breast tumour tissues by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) and Methylation Specific (MS)-MLPA methods, respectively. Our analyses revealed that 12.4% of the breast cancer (BC) patients had tumours with a BRCA1ness profile. TIMP3 showed significantly higher (p = 5.8small ha, Cyrillic10(-5)) methylation frequency in tumours with BRCA1ness, while methylation of APC, GSTP1 and RASSF1 promoters was negatively associated with BRCA1ness (small er, Cyrillic = 0.0017, small er, Cyrillic = 0.007 and small er, Cyrillic = 0.046, respectively). TIMP3 methylation was also associated with triple negative (TN) BC. Furthermore, TN tumours showing BRCA1ness showed stronger association with TIMP3 methylation (p = 0.0008) in comparison to TN tumours without BRCA1ness (p = 0.009). In conclusion, we confirmed that TIMP3 methylation is a marker for TN tumours and furthermore we showed for the first time that TIMP3 promoter methylation is an epigenetic marker of BRCA1ness tumours.. Tumours presenting BRCAness profile behave more aggressively and are more invasive as a consequence of their complex genetic and epigenetic alterations, caused by impaired fidelity of the DNA repair processes. Methylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative mechanism to inactivate DNA repair and tumour suppressor genes. In our study, we analyzed the frequency of methylation changes of 24 tumour suppressor genes and explored their association with BRCAness profile. BRCA1ness profile and aberrant methylation were studied in 233 fresh frozen breast tumour tissues by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) and Methylation Specific (MS)-MLPA methods, respectively. Our analyses revealed that 12.4% of the breast cancer (BC) patients had tumours with a BRCA1ness profile. TIMP3 showed significantly higher (p = 5.8small ha, Cyrillic10(-5)) methylation frequency in tumours with BRCA1ness, while methylation of APC, GSTP1 and RASSF1 promoters was negatively associated with BRCA1ness (small er, Cyrillic = 0.0017, small er, Cyrillic = 0.007 and small er, Cyrillic = 0.046, respectively). TIMP3 methylation was also associated with triple negative (TN) BC. Furthermore, TN tumours showing BRCA1ness showed stronger association with TIMP3 methylation (p = 0.0008) in comparison to TN tumours without BRCA1ness (p = 0.009). In conclusion, we confirmed that TIMP3 methylation is a marker for TN tumours and furthermore we showed for the first time that TIMP3 promoter methylation is an epigenetic marker of BRCA1ness tumours.

GPER1, also known as GPR30, is a novel seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled estrogen receptor that mediates both short-term (non-genomic) and long-term (genomic) effects of estrogen in target cells and tissues. A substantial body of work over the last two decades has highlighted its therapeutic or prognostic utility. However, the clinical data on the expression of GPER1 in breast tissue is ambiguous. Analysis of TCGA RNAseq data revealed significantly lower mean expression of GPER1 mRNA in primary breast tumors compared to that in normal breast tissues. This provides support to the tumor suppressor role for GPER1. However, the mechanisms underlying the reduced expression are not completely understood. We analyzed the expression levels of GPER1 mRNA variants in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells by RT-PCR, and the methylation status of two CpG islands in the GPER1 locus by modified COBRA assays and bisulfite sequencing. Our results show that MCF-7 cells express higher levels of GPER1 mRNA variants compared to MDA-MB-231 cells. Modified COBRA assays revealed differential methylation in the upstream CpG island (upCpGi) that overlaps with the first exon of two GPER1 variants (GPER1v2 and v3) but not in the downstream CpG island (dnCpGi) that overlaps with the coding region common to all variants. Bisulfite sequencing results showed that the core upCpGi was hypo-methylated in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, eight CpGs in the 3' end of the upCpGi were hyper-methylated in MDA-MB-231 cells. 5-Azacytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, induced the expression levels of GPER1 mRNA variants in MDA-MB-231 cells. Expression-methylation correlation analysis of TCGA breast cancer data revealed that methylation of CpGs in the regions flanking the upCpGi significantly correlated negatively with GPER1 mRNA expression. Taken together, our results demonstrate the role of DNA methylation in GPER1 repression, implicate the flanking regions (shore) of the upCpGi, and suggest a potential mechanism of GPER1 silencing in breast tumors.. GPER1, also known as GPR30, is a novel seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled estrogen receptor that mediates both short-term (non-genomic) and long-term (genomic) effects of estrogen in target cells and tissues. A substantial body of work over the last two decades has highlighted its therapeutic or prognostic utility. However, the clinical data on the expression of GPER1 in breast tissue is ambiguous. Analysis of TCGA RNAseq data revealed significantly lower mean expression of GPER1 mRNA in primary breast tumors compared to that in normal breast tissues. This provides support to the tumor suppressor role for GPER1. However, the mechanisms underlying the reduced expression are not completely understood. We analyzed the expression levels of GPER1 mRNA variants in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells by RT-PCR, and the methylation status of two CpG islands in the GPER1 locus by modified COBRA assays and bisulfite sequencing. Our results show that MCF-7 cells express higher levels of GPER1 mRNA variants compared to MDA-MB-231 cells. Modified COBRA assays revealed differential methylation in the upstream CpG island (upCpGi) that overlaps with the first exon of two GPER1 variants (GPER1v2 and v3) but not in the downstream CpG island (dnCpGi) that overlaps with the coding region common to all variants. Bisulfite sequencing results showed that the core upCpGi was hypo-methylated in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. However, eight CpGs in the 3' end of the upCpGi were hyper-methylated in MDA-MB-231 cells. 5-Azacytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, induced the expression levels of GPER1 mRNA variants in MDA-MB-231 cells. Expression-methylation correlation analysis of TCGA breast cancer data revealed that methylation of CpGs in the regions flanking the upCpGi significantly correlated negatively with GPER1 mRNA expression. Taken together, our results demonstrate the role of DNA methylation in GPER1 repression, implicate the flanking regions (shore) of the upCpGi, and suggest a potential mechanism of GPER1 silencing in breast tumors.

Intraductal proliferative lesions of the breast including usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) are associated with increased risk, albeit of greatly different magnitudes, for the subsequent development of invasive carcinoma. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) has been widely accepted as a prognostic marker and a predictor for endocrine therapy response of breast cancer. To investigate the ERalpha expression and methylation in breast intraductal proliferative lesions, we analyzed ERalpha expression in breast intraductal proliferative lesions including pure UDH (N=98), ADH without DCIS (N=160), DCIS without invasive breast cancer (N=149) by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, the methylation status of ERalpha by methylationspecific PCR (MSP) was defined in 217 cases of breast intraductal proliferative lesions. Immunohistochemistry showed that 98/98 (100%) of the UDH cases were positive for ERalpha expression. ERalpha protein expression in ADH (132/160) (92.5%) was higher than in DCIS (101/149) (67.8%). But the ERalpha expression pattern was different with histological diversity of breast intraductal proliferative lesions. The average percent cells staining positive for ERalpha was 35.33% in UDH, 87.75% in ADH and 71.45% in DCIS. ERalpha methylation in 32/60 (53.3%) UDH, 11/77 (10.2%) ADH and 32/80 (40.0%) DCIS. Our results demonstrated a strong negative correlation between the percent of cells staining positive for ERalpha and ERalpha methylation (r=0.831, p<0.001). Taken together, our results underlined that ERalpha expression or methylation may be involved in the breast carcinogenesis and advancement, thus it is not parallel to breast cancer risk in breast intraductal proliferative lesions. No obvious watershed between ERalphapositive and negative breast carcinogenesis was established. Estrogen receptor (ER) methylation or expression is a reversible signal in breast carcinogenesis which affected biological behavior of cells.. Intraductal proliferative lesions of the breast including usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) and ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) are associated with increased risk, albeit of greatly different magnitudes, for the subsequent development of invasive carcinoma. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) has been widely accepted as a prognostic marker and a predictor for endocrine therapy response of breast cancer. To investigate the ERalpha expression and methylation in breast intraductal proliferative lesions, we analyzed ERalpha expression in breast intraductal proliferative lesions including pure UDH (N=98), ADH without DCIS (N=160), DCIS without invasive breast cancer (N=149) by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, the methylation status of ERalpha by methylationspecific PCR (MSP) was defined in 217 cases of breast intraductal proliferative lesions. Immunohistochemistry showed that 98/98 (100%) of the UDH cases were positive for ERalpha expression. ERalpha protein expression in ADH (132/160) (92.5%) was higher than in DCIS (101/149) (67.8%). But the ERalpha expression pattern was different with histological diversity of breast intraductal proliferative lesions. The average percent cells staining positive for ERalpha was 35.33% in UDH, 87.75% in ADH and 71.45% in DCIS. ERalpha methylation in 32/60 (53.3%) UDH, 11/77 (10.2%) ADH and 32/80 (40.0%) DCIS. Our results demonstrated a strong negative correlation between the percent of cells staining positive for ERalpha and ERalpha methylation (r=0.831, p<0.001). Taken together, our results underlined that ERalpha expression or methylation may be involved in the breast carcinogenesis and advancement, thus it is not parallel to breast cancer risk in breast intraductal proliferative lesions. No obvious watershed between ERalphapositive and negative breast carcinogenesis was established. Estrogen receptor (ER) methylation or expression is a reversible signal in breast carcinogenesis which affected biological behavior of cells.

Metastasis tumor antigen 1 (MTA1), a novel candidate metastasis-associated gene, is known to increase the migration and invasion of various tumor cells in vitro. It also plays an important role in tumorigenesis and tumor aggressiveness of breast cancer. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) plays an important role in the etiology of breast cancer and has been widely accepted as a prognostic marker for breast cancer and a response predictor for endocrine therapy. The ERalpha gene methylation has been linked to the lack of ERalpha expression in breast cancer. The aim of the study is to assess the correlation between the ERalpha methylation and MTA1 expression in breast cancer and further to investigate whether the repressed ERalpha methylation can downregulate the expression of MTA1 in vitro. In general, we found ERalpha methylation had significant correlation with the MTA1 expression (p < 0.05) in female patients of breast cancer (n = 102) by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. To gain a deeper insight into the molecular mechanism underlying the relation between MTA1 and ERalpha methylation, we treated the invasive breast cancer cell lines with the demethylating agent, found the downregulation of MTA1 protein expression, and mRNA with the unmethylation of ERalpha (p < 0.05). And the invasive ability of breast cancer cells was significantly positively associated with MTA1 expression. These unique findings have greatly extended our current knowledge about the relation between ERalpha methylation and MTA1 expression. These data strongly support the hypothesis that methylation is involved in the relation between MTA1 and ERalpha in breast cancer.. Metastasis tumor antigen 1 (MTA1), a novel candidate metastasis-associated gene, is known to increase the migration and invasion of various tumor cells in vitro. It also plays an important role in tumorigenesis and tumor aggressiveness of breast cancer. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) plays an important role in the etiology of breast cancer and has been widely accepted as a prognostic marker for breast cancer and a response predictor for endocrine therapy. The ERalpha gene methylation has been linked to the lack of ERalpha expression in breast cancer. The aim of the study is to assess the correlation between the ERalpha methylation and MTA1 expression in breast cancer and further to investigate whether the repressed ERalpha methylation can downregulate the expression of MTA1 in vitro. In general, we found ERalpha methylation had significant correlation with the MTA1 expression (p < 0.05) in female patients of breast cancer (n = 102) by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. To gain a deeper insight into the molecular mechanism underlying the relation between MTA1 and ERalpha methylation, we treated the invasive breast cancer cell lines with the demethylating agent, found the downregulation of MTA1 protein expression, and mRNA with the unmethylation of ERalpha (p < 0.05). And the invasive ability of breast cancer cells was significantly positively associated with MTA1 expression. These unique findings have greatly extended our current knowledge about the relation between ERalpha methylation and MTA1 expression. These data strongly support the hypothesis that methylation is involved in the relation between MTA1 and ERalpha in breast cancer.

Calcitriol (1alpha, 25(OH)(2)-Vitamin D3) binds to the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and regulates differentiation of the normal mammary gland, and may therefore be useful in breast cancer treatment or prevention. Many breast cancer cells are, however, resistant to Calcitriol. In this study, we investigated the resistance mechanism and the role of epigenetic silencing of VDR by promoter hypermethylation. Bisulfite sequencing of the VDR promoter region revealed methylated CpG islands at -700 base pairs (bp) upstream and near the transcription start site. VDR CpG islands were demethylated by 5'deoxy-azacytidine treatment, and this was accompanied by a parallel increase in VDR mRNA levels in breast cancer cell lines. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR analyses confirmed hypermethylation of these CpG islands in primary tumors, and its absence in normal breast tissue. VDR transcripts detected in breast cancers were predominantly 5'-truncated, while normal breast tissue expressed full-length transcripts. Consistent with this observation, genes containing the VDR-responsive element (VDRE), such as cytochrome p450 hydroxylases, p21 or C/EBP were underexpressed in breast cancers compared to normal breast samples. Expression of the active longer transcripts of VDR was restored with 5'deoxy-Azacytidine (AZA) treatment, with a concurrent increase in expression of VDRE-containing genes. Thus, promoter methylation-mediated silencing of expression of the functional variants of VDR may contribute to reduced expression of downstream effectors of the VDR pathway and subsequent Calcitriol insensitivity in breast cancer. These data suggest that pharmacological reversal of VDR methylation may re-establish breast cancer cell susceptibility to differentiation therapy using Calcitriol.. Calcitriol (1alpha, 25(OH)(2)-Vitamin D3) binds to the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and regulates differentiation of the normal mammary gland, and may therefore be useful in breast cancer treatment or prevention. Many breast cancer cells are, however, resistant to Calcitriol. In this study, we investigated the resistance mechanism and the role of epigenetic silencing of VDR by promoter hypermethylation. Bisulfite sequencing of the VDR promoter region revealed methylated CpG islands at -700 base pairs (bp) upstream and near the transcription start site. VDR CpG islands were demethylated by 5'deoxy-azacytidine treatment, and this was accompanied by a parallel increase in VDR mRNA levels in breast cancer cell lines. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR analyses confirmed hypermethylation of these CpG islands in primary tumors, and its absence in normal breast tissue. VDR transcripts detected in breast cancers were predominantly 5'-truncated, while normal breast tissue expressed full-length transcripts. Consistent with this observation, genes containing the VDR-responsive element (VDRE), such as cytochrome p450 hydroxylases, p21 or C/EBP were underexpressed in breast cancers compared to normal breast samples. Expression of the active longer transcripts of VDR was restored with 5'deoxy-Azacytidine (AZA) treatment, with a concurrent increase in expression of VDRE-containing genes. Thus, promoter methylation-mediated silencing of expression of the functional variants of VDR may contribute to reduced expression of downstream effectors of the VDR pathway and subsequent Calcitriol insensitivity in breast cancer. These data suggest that pharmacological reversal of VDR methylation may re-establish breast cancer cell susceptibility to differentiation therapy using Calcitriol.

In cancer, epigenetic changes such as covalent addition of methyl groups to the genomic DNA itself are more prominent than genetic changes. Cytosine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG) methylation negatively affects gene transcription of an adjacent gene. It is thought that DNA methylation significantly contributes to all hallmarks of cancer. Next to being a potential therapy target, DNA methylation is an emerging field of biomarkers. Technically, DNA provides a stable and robust analyte that is particularly suitable for clinical applications. Moreover, there are numerous potential human DNA sources that could facilitate integration of methylation tests in clinical practice. In breast cancer, DNA methylation has shown promise as a potential biomarker for early detection, therapy monitoring, assessment of prognosis or prediction of therapy response. In particular, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) DNA methylation has been validated using a robust assay for paraffin-embedded tissue for clinically relevant outcome prediction in early breast cancer patients treated by adjuvant tamoxifen therapy.. In cancer, epigenetic changes such as covalent addition of methyl groups to the genomic DNA itself are more prominent than genetic changes. Cytosine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG) methylation negatively affects gene transcription of an adjacent gene. It is thought that DNA methylation significantly contributes to all hallmarks of cancer. Next to being a potential therapy target, DNA methylation is an emerging field of biomarkers. Technically, DNA provides a stable and robust analyte that is particularly suitable for clinical applications. Moreover, there are numerous potential human DNA sources that could facilitate integration of methylation tests in clinical practice. In breast cancer, DNA methylation has shown promise as a potential biomarker for early detection, therapy monitoring, assessment of prognosis or prediction of therapy response. In particular, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) DNA methylation has been validated using a robust assay for paraffin-embedded tissue for clinically relevant outcome prediction in early breast cancer patients treated by adjuvant tamoxifen therapy.

To understand the biological basis of resistance to endocrine therapy is of utmost importance in patients with steroid hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. Not only will this allow us prediction of therapy success, it may also lead to novel therapies for patients resistant to current endocrine therapy. DNA methylation in the promoter regions of genes is a prominent epigenetic gene silencing mechanism that contributes to breast cancer biology. In the current study, we investigated whether promoter DNA methylation could be associated with resistance to endocrine therapy in patients with recurrent breast cancer. Using a microarray-based technology, the promoter DNA methylation status of 117 candidate genes was studied in a cohort of 200 steroid hormone receptor-positive tumors of patients who received the antiestrogen tamoxifen as first-line treatment for recurrent breast cancer. Of the genes analyzed, the promoter DNA methylation status of 10 genes was significantly associated with clinical outcome of tamoxifen therapy. The association of the promoter hypermethylation of the strongest marker, phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT1) with favorable clinical outcome was confirmed by an independent quantitative DNA methylation detection method. Furthermore, the extent of DNA methylation of PSAT1 was inversely associated with its expression at the mRNA level. Finally, also at the mRNA level, PSAT1 was a predictor of tamoxifen therapy response. Concluding, our work indicates that promoter hypermethylation and mRNA expression of PSAT1 are indicators of response to tamoxifen-based endocrine therapy in steroid hormone receptor-positive patients with recurrent breast cancer.. To understand the biological basis of resistance to endocrine therapy is of utmost importance in patients with steroid hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. Not only will this allow us prediction of therapy success, it may also lead to novel therapies for patients resistant to current endocrine therapy. DNA methylation in the promoter regions of genes is a prominent epigenetic gene silencing mechanism that contributes to breast cancer biology. In the current study, we investigated whether promoter DNA methylation could be associated with resistance to endocrine therapy in patients with recurrent breast cancer. Using a microarray-based technology, the promoter DNA methylation status of 117 candidate genes was studied in a cohort of 200 steroid hormone receptor-positive tumors of patients who received the antiestrogen tamoxifen as first-line treatment for recurrent breast cancer. Of the genes analyzed, the promoter DNA methylation status of 10 genes was significantly associated with clinical outcome of tamoxifen therapy. The association of the promoter hypermethylation of the strongest marker, phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT1) with favorable clinical outcome was confirmed by an independent quantitative DNA methylation detection method. Furthermore, the extent of DNA methylation of PSAT1 was inversely associated with its expression at the mRNA level. Finally, also at the mRNA level, PSAT1 was a predictor of tamoxifen therapy response. Concluding, our work indicates that promoter hypermethylation and mRNA expression of PSAT1 are indicators of response to tamoxifen-based endocrine therapy in steroid hormone receptor-positive patients with recurrent breast cancer.

pS2 gene has been used to investigate the relationship between alterations of DNA methylation patterns in human tumors and gene expression. The expression of pS2, which is transcriptionally controlled by estrogens in breast cancer cell lines, is restricted to estrogen-receptor-rich human breast tumors. We found that the CCGG site within the promoter/enhancer sequence of pS2 was hypomethylated in estrogen-receptor-rich breast tumors expressing this gene. The amount of DNA molecules unmethylated at this site was related to the amount of pS2 mRNA detected in the samples. The demethylation of this region, which contains the estrogen responsive element, was confirmed by genomic sequencing. Transient expression of functional human estrogen receptors stimulated the expression of the endogenous pS2 in HeLa cells, but failed, in BT-20 cells, to stimulate expression of this gene. Since the promoter/enhancer region of pS2 is unmethylated in HeLa cells and methylated in BT-20 cells, these data also support the hypothesis that DNA methylation might be involved in the control of pS2 expression.. pS2 gene has been used to investigate the relationship between alterations of DNA methylation patterns in human tumors and gene expression. The expression of pS2, which is transcriptionally controlled by estrogens in breast cancer cell lines, is restricted to estrogen-receptor-rich human breast tumors. We found that the CCGG site within the promoter/enhancer sequence of pS2 was hypomethylated in estrogen-receptor-rich breast tumors expressing this gene. The amount of DNA molecules unmethylated at this site was related to the amount of pS2 mRNA detected in the samples. The demethylation of this region, which contains the estrogen responsive element, was confirmed by genomic sequencing. Transient expression of functional human estrogen receptors stimulated the expression of the endogenous pS2 in HeLa cells, but failed, in BT-20 cells, to stimulate expression of this gene. Since the promoter/enhancer region of pS2 is unmethylated in HeLa cells and methylated in BT-20 cells, these data also support the hypothesis that DNA methylation might be involved in the control of pS2 expression.

BACKGROUND: Tumor expression of estrogen receptor (ER) is an important marker of prognosis, and is predictive of response to endocrine therapy in breast cancer. Several studies have observed that epigenetic events, such methylation of cytosines and deacetylation of histones, are involved in the complex mechanisms that regulate promoter transcription. However, the exact interplay of these factors in transcription activity is not well understood. In this study, we explored the relationship between ER expression status in tumor tissue samples and the methylation of the 5' CpG promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) isolated from free circulating DNA (fcDNA) in plasma samples from breast cancer patients. METHODS: Patients (n = 110) with non-metastatic breast cancer had analyses performed of ER expression (luminal phenotype in tumor tissue, by immunohistochemistry method), and the ESR1-DNA methylation status (fcDNA in plasma, by quantitative methylation specific PCR technique). RESULTS: Our results showed a significant association between presence of methylated ESR1 in patients with breast cancer and ER negative status in the tumor tissue (p = 0.0179). There was a trend towards a higher probability of ESR1-methylation in those phenotypes with poor prognosis i.e. 80% of triple negative patients, 60% of HER2 patients, compared to 28% and 5.9% of patients with better prognosis such as luminal A and luminal B, respectively. CONCLUSION: Silencing, by methylation, of the promoter region of the ESR1 affects the expression of the estrogen receptor protein in tumors of breast cancer patients; high methylation of ESR1-DNA is associated with estrogen receptor negative status which, in turn, may be implicated in the patient's resistance to hormonal treatment in breast cancer. As such, epigenetic markers in plasma may be of interest as new targets for anticancer therapy, especially with respect to endocrine treatment.. BACKGROUND: Tumor expression of estrogen receptor (ER) is an important marker of prognosis, and is predictive of response to endocrine therapy in breast cancer. Several studies have observed that epigenetic events, such methylation of cytosines and deacetylation of histones, are involved in the complex mechanisms that regulate promoter transcription. However, the exact interplay of these factors in transcription activity is not well understood. In this study, we explored the relationship between ER expression status in tumor tissue samples and the methylation of the 5' CpG promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) isolated from free circulating DNA (fcDNA) in plasma samples from breast cancer patients. METHODS: Patients (n = 110) with non-metastatic breast cancer had analyses performed of ER expression (luminal phenotype in tumor tissue, by immunohistochemistry method), and the ESR1-DNA methylation status (fcDNA in plasma, by quantitative methylation specific PCR technique). RESULTS: Our results showed a significant association between presence of methylated ESR1 in patients with breast cancer and ER negative status in the tumor tissue (p = 0.0179). There was a trend towards a higher probability of ESR1-methylation in those phenotypes with poor prognosis i.e. 80% of triple negative patients, 60% of HER2 patients, compared to 28% and 5.9% of patients with better prognosis such as luminal A and luminal B, respectively. CONCLUSION: Silencing, by methylation, of the promoter region of the ESR1 affects the expression of the estrogen receptor protein in tumors of breast cancer patients; high methylation of ESR1-DNA is associated with estrogen receptor negative status which, in turn, may be implicated in the patient's resistance to hormonal treatment in breast cancer. As such, epigenetic markers in plasma may be of interest as new targets for anticancer therapy, especially with respect to endocrine treatment.

Previously, we reported that the accuracy of cytological diagnosis of breast lesions could be augmented through the quantitative assessment of DNA methylation of fine-needle aspirate (FNA) washings. Herein, we aimed at the evaluation of the prognostic value of quantitative promoter methylation at three gene loci (APC, CCND2, and RASSF1A) in a large series of FNA washings from breast lesions. Methylation levels of three gene promoters were assessed by quantitative methylation-specific PCR in bisulfite-modified DNA from 211 FNA washings, comprising 178 carcinomas and 33 benign lesions, both histopathologically confirmed. Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to determine the diagnostic performance of the gene panel in distinguishing cancer from non-cancerous lesions. Relevant clinicopathologic data and time to progression and/or death from breast cancer were correlated with methylation findings. Log-rank test and Cox-regression model identified independent predictors of prognosis. APC, CCND2, and RASSF1A methylation levels differed significantly between malignant and benign lesions. ROC curve analysis confirmed the diagnostic performance of the gene panel. In univariate analysis, stage was significantly associated with overall, disease-specific and disease-free survival, whereas tumor grade was associated with disease-specific and disease-free survival. Remarkably, RASSF1A methylation was significantly and independently associated with worse disease-free survival in the final multivariate analysis. We confirmed that quantitative gene promoter methylation augments the diagnostic performance of cytopathology. Importantly, and in addition to standard clinicopathologic parameters, RASSF1A high-methylation levels are independent predictors of worse outcome in breast cancer. Thus, epigenetic biomarkers provide valuable tools for breast cancer patient management.. Previously, we reported that the accuracy of cytological diagnosis of breast lesions could be augmented through the quantitative assessment of DNA methylation of fine-needle aspirate (FNA) washings. Herein, we aimed at the evaluation of the prognostic value of quantitative promoter methylation at three gene loci (APC, CCND2, and RASSF1A) in a large series of FNA washings from breast lesions. Methylation levels of three gene promoters were assessed by quantitative methylation-specific PCR in bisulfite-modified DNA from 211 FNA washings, comprising 178 carcinomas and 33 benign lesions, both histopathologically confirmed. Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to determine the diagnostic performance of the gene panel in distinguishing cancer from non-cancerous lesions. Relevant clinicopathologic data and time to progression and/or death from breast cancer were correlated with methylation findings. Log-rank test and Cox-regression model identified independent predictors of prognosis. APC, CCND2, and RASSF1A methylation levels differed significantly between malignant and benign lesions. ROC curve analysis confirmed the diagnostic performance of the gene panel. In univariate analysis, stage was significantly associated with overall, disease-specific and disease-free survival, whereas tumor grade was associated with disease-specific and disease-free survival. Remarkably, RASSF1A methylation was significantly and independently associated with worse disease-free survival in the final multivariate analysis. We confirmed that quantitative gene promoter methylation augments the diagnostic performance of cytopathology. Importantly, and in addition to standard clinicopathologic parameters, RASSF1A high-methylation levels are independent predictors of worse outcome in breast cancer. Thus, epigenetic biomarkers provide valuable tools for breast cancer patient management.

INTRODUCTION: Giant fibroadenoma is an uncommon variant of benign breast lesions. Aberrant methylation of CpG islands in promoter regions is known to be involved in the silencing of genes (for example, tumor-suppressor genes) and appears to be an early event in the etiology of breast carcinogenesis. Only hypermethylation of p16INK4a has been reported in non-giant breast fibroadenoma. In this particular case, there are no previously published data on epigenetic alterations in giant fibroadenomas. Our previous results, based on the analysis of 49 cancer-related CpG islands have confirmed that the aberrant methylation is specific to malignant breast tumors and that it is completely absent in normal breast tissue and breast fibroadenomas. CASE PRESENTATION: A 13-year-old Hispanic girl was referred after she had noted a progressive development of a mass in her left breast. On physical examination, a 10 x 10 cm lump was detected and axillary lymph nodes were not enlarged. After surgical removal the lump was diagnosed as a giant fibroadenoma. Because of the high growth rate of this benign tumor, we decided to analyze the methylation status of 49 CpG islands related to cell growth control. We have identified the methylation of five cancer-related CpG islands in the giant fibroadenoma tissue: ESR1, MGMT, WT-1, BRCA2 and CD44. CONCLUSION: In this case report we show for the first time the methylation analysis of a giant fibroadenoma. The detection of methylation of these five cancer-related regions indicates substantial epigenomic differences with non-giant fibroadenomas. Epigenetic alterations could explain the higher growth rate of this tumor. Our data contribute to the growing knowledge of aberrant methylation in breast diseases. In this particular case, there exist no previous data regarding the role of methylation in giant fibroadenomas, considered by definition as a benign breast lesion.. INTRODUCTION: Giant fibroadenoma is an uncommon variant of benign breast lesions. Aberrant methylation of CpG islands in promoter regions is known to be involved in the silencing of genes (for example, tumor-suppressor genes) and appears to be an early event in the etiology of breast carcinogenesis. Only hypermethylation of p16INK4a has been reported in non-giant breast fibroadenoma. In this particular case, there are no previously published data on epigenetic alterations in giant fibroadenomas. Our previous results, based on the analysis of 49 cancer-related CpG islands have confirmed that the aberrant methylation is specific to malignant breast tumors and that it is completely absent in normal breast tissue and breast fibroadenomas. CASE PRESENTATION: A 13-year-old Hispanic girl was referred after she had noted a progressive development of a mass in her left breast. On physical examination, a 10 x 10 cm lump was detected and axillary lymph nodes were not enlarged. After surgical removal the lump was diagnosed as a giant fibroadenoma. Because of the high growth rate of this benign tumor, we decided to analyze the methylation status of 49 CpG islands related to cell growth control. We have identified the methylation of five cancer-related CpG islands in the giant fibroadenoma tissue: ESR1, MGMT, WT-1, BRCA2 and CD44. CONCLUSION: In this case report we show for the first time the methylation analysis of a giant fibroadenoma. The detection of methylation of these five cancer-related regions indicates substantial epigenomic differences with non-giant fibroadenomas. Epigenetic alterations could explain the higher growth rate of this tumor. Our data contribute to the growing knowledge of aberrant methylation in breast diseases. In this particular case, there exist no previous data regarding the role of methylation in giant fibroadenomas, considered by definition as a benign breast lesion.

Genetic and epigenetic events play a critical role in the tumorigenic process of breast cancer. The more genes are studied, the more accurate the epigenetic "signature" can be established. The aim of our work has been to apply the technique Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) to study the methylation profile of 26 cancer related gene regions in breast cancers. Secondly, we aimed to establish if the epigenetic "signature" could serve to detect circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in breast cancer patients. The MS-MLPA was successfully setup and allowed to establish which regions were preferentially associated with the tumor process. The analysis permitted also to detect significant concurrent methylation between some genes. The detection of ctDNA could be performed by a "double-round" MS-MLPA (drMS-MLPA) approach and nested-Methyl Specific PCR (Nested-MSP). This development is an important novelty and served to detect a small amount of tumor DNA shaded into the blood stream of breast cancer patients. We conclude that MS-MLPA is an excellent assay to analyze the methylation profile of a tumor. The 82 studied samples presented a specific methylation "mark". These studies serve to enhance the knowledge of the role of epigenetic alterations in breast tumors and can contribute to the development of personalized diagnosis, surveillance and treatment strategies.. Genetic and epigenetic events play a critical role in the tumorigenic process of breast cancer. The more genes are studied, the more accurate the epigenetic "signature" can be established. The aim of our work has been to apply the technique Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) to study the methylation profile of 26 cancer related gene regions in breast cancers. Secondly, we aimed to establish if the epigenetic "signature" could serve to detect circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in breast cancer patients. The MS-MLPA was successfully setup and allowed to establish which regions were preferentially associated with the tumor process. The analysis permitted also to detect significant concurrent methylation between some genes. The detection of ctDNA could be performed by a "double-round" MS-MLPA (drMS-MLPA) approach and nested-Methyl Specific PCR (Nested-MSP). This development is an important novelty and served to detect a small amount of tumor DNA shaded into the blood stream of breast cancer patients. We conclude that MS-MLPA is an excellent assay to analyze the methylation profile of a tumor. The 82 studied samples presented a specific methylation "mark". These studies serve to enhance the knowledge of the role of epigenetic alterations in breast tumors and can contribute to the development of personalized diagnosis, surveillance and treatment strategies.

Breast carcinogenesis is a multistep process that involves both genetic and epigenetic alterations. Identification of aberrantly methylated genes in breast tumors and their relation to clinical parameters can contribute to improved diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic decision making. Our objective in the present study was to identify the methylation status of 34 cancer-involved genes in invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC). Each of the 70 IDC cases analyzed had a unique methylation profile. The highest methylation frequency was detected in the WT1 (95.7%) and RASSF1 (71.4%) genes. Hierarchical cluster analysis revealed three clusters with different distribution of the prognostic factors tumor grade, lymph node metastasis, and proliferation rate. Methylation of TP73 was associated with high histological grade and high proliferation rate; methylation of RARB was associated with lymph node metastasis. Concurrent methylation of TP73 and RARB was associated with high histological grade, high proliferation rate, increased tumor size, and lymph node metastasis. Patients with more than six methylated genes had higher rates of relapse events and cancer deaths. In multivariate analysis, TP73 methylation and the methylation index were associated with disease outcome. Our results indicate that methylation index and methylation of TP73 and/or RARB are related to unfavorable prognostic factors in patients with IDC. These epigenetic markers should be validated in further studies to improve breast cancer management.. Breast carcinogenesis is a multistep process that involves both genetic and epigenetic alterations. Identification of aberrantly methylated genes in breast tumors and their relation to clinical parameters can contribute to improved diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic decision making. Our objective in the present study was to identify the methylation status of 34 cancer-involved genes in invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC). Each of the 70 IDC cases analyzed had a unique methylation profile. The highest methylation frequency was detected in the WT1 (95.7%) and RASSF1 (71.4%) genes. Hierarchical cluster analysis revealed three clusters with different distribution of the prognostic factors tumor grade, lymph node metastasis, and proliferation rate. Methylation of TP73 was associated with high histological grade and high proliferation rate; methylation of RARB was associated with lymph node metastasis. Concurrent methylation of TP73 and RARB was associated with high histological grade, high proliferation rate, increased tumor size, and lymph node metastasis. Patients with more than six methylated genes had higher rates of relapse events and cancer deaths. In multivariate analysis, TP73 methylation and the methylation index were associated with disease outcome. Our results indicate that methylation index and methylation of TP73 and/or RARB are related to unfavorable prognostic factors in patients with IDC. These epigenetic markers should be validated in further studies to improve breast cancer management.

BACKGROUND: It is documented that in tumor cell lines, the hTERT gene exhibits prominent methylation at a CpG island rich region about -600 bp upstream of the transcription start site, but mixed or allelically absent around +/-150 bp region. Given the potential clinical implications of the findings in breast cancer diagnostics, we set out to investigate if such findings are reproducible on primary surgically resected invasive breast carcinomas. METHODS: The cohort consisted of 50 cases of freshly sampled and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) invasive breast cancers and normal tissue. A modified quasi-quantitative methylation specific polymerase chain reaction was used to determine methylation status in cancer relative to normal tissue at the 2 CpG island-rich regions. RESULTS: A global hypermethylation is evident at the -600 bp region in both fresh and parallel FFPE breast cancers as compared to normal tissue. In contrast, most of the tumor and normal tissue remains unmethylated around the +/-150 bp region. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support further development of hTERT hypermethylation in the -600 bp region as a biomarker for breast cancer diagnostics. The unmethylated status of +/-150 bp region in normal breast tissue does not support the suggestion that unmethylation is required for hTERT gene expression.. BACKGROUND: It is documented that in tumor cell lines, the hTERT gene exhibits prominent methylation at a CpG island rich region about -600 bp upstream of the transcription start site, but mixed or allelically absent around +/-150 bp region. Given the potential clinical implications of the findings in breast cancer diagnostics, we set out to investigate if such findings are reproducible on primary surgically resected invasive breast carcinomas. METHODS: The cohort consisted of 50 cases of freshly sampled and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) invasive breast cancers and normal tissue. A modified quasi-quantitative methylation specific polymerase chain reaction was used to determine methylation status in cancer relative to normal tissue at the 2 CpG island-rich regions. RESULTS: A global hypermethylation is evident at the -600 bp region in both fresh and parallel FFPE breast cancers as compared to normal tissue. In contrast, most of the tumor and normal tissue remains unmethylated around the +/-150 bp region. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support further development of hTERT hypermethylation in the -600 bp region as a biomarker for breast cancer diagnostics. The unmethylated status of +/-150 bp region in normal breast tissue does not support the suggestion that unmethylation is required for hTERT gene expression.

BACKGROUND: DNA hypermethylation has been documented to be prominent at a CpG island rich region about 600 bp upstream the transcription start site of the hTERT gene using qualitative methylation specific PCR on DNA isolated from tumor cell lines. In order to assess the potential significance of this biomarker in breast cancer research and diagnosis, we explored if such findings are reproducible on surgically resected fresh breast tumor cells. METHODS: Using quantitative pyrosequencing technology, we investigated and present methylation status of four CpG islands of this region in a cohort of 77 invasive breast carcinomas using normal breast tissue as controls. RESULTS: Globally, a significant hypermethylation in tumor cells was observed in the four CpG islands as a sum, in comparison to methylation of the normal breast tissue. Individually, certain CpG islands displayed methylation greater than 50% in about 3/4 of the 77 breast cancers, but in none of the normal breast tissue. Our results highlight the value of DNA hypermethylation in the -600 bp region of the hTERT gene as a potential marker for breast cancer diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: We believe that integration of this novel, malignancy-associated molecular testing with morphology is of significant value in the accurate interpretation of small tumor sample size obtained via fine needle aspiration biopsy, ductal lavage, and nipple fluid aspirates both in clinical practice and in breast cancer research. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2016;44:670-675. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.. BACKGROUND: DNA hypermethylation has been documented to be prominent at a CpG island rich region about 600 bp upstream the transcription start site of the hTERT gene using qualitative methylation specific PCR on DNA isolated from tumor cell lines. In order to assess the potential significance of this biomarker in breast cancer research and diagnosis, we explored if such findings are reproducible on surgically resected fresh breast tumor cells. METHODS: Using quantitative pyrosequencing technology, we investigated and present methylation status of four CpG islands of this region in a cohort of 77 invasive breast carcinomas using normal breast tissue as controls. RESULTS: Globally, a significant hypermethylation in tumor cells was observed in the four CpG islands as a sum, in comparison to methylation of the normal breast tissue. Individually, certain CpG islands displayed methylation greater than 50% in about 3/4 of the 77 breast cancers, but in none of the normal breast tissue. Our results highlight the value of DNA hypermethylation in the -600 bp region of the hTERT gene as a potential marker for breast cancer diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: We believe that integration of this novel, malignancy-associated molecular testing with morphology is of significant value in the accurate interpretation of small tumor sample size obtained via fine needle aspiration biopsy, ductal lavage, and nipple fluid aspirates both in clinical practice and in breast cancer research. Diagn. Cytopathol. 2016;44:670-675. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Purpose: Liquid biopsy provides real-time monitoring of tumor evolution and response to therapy through analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and plasma-circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). ESR1 epigenetic silencing potentially affects response to endocrine treatment. We evaluated ESR1 methylation in CTCs and paired plasma ctDNA. We evaluated ESR1 methylation in CTCs and paired plasma ctDNA as a potential biomarker for response to everolimus/exemestane treatment.Experimental Design: A highly sensitive and specific real-time MSP assay for ESR1 methylation was developed and validated in (i) 65 primary breast tumors formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE), (ii) EpCAM(+) CTC fractions (122 patients and 30 healthy donors; HD), (iii) plasma ctDNA (108 patients and 30HD), and (iv) in CTCs (CellSearch) and in paired plasma ctDNA for 58 patients with breast cancer. ESR1 methylation status was investigated in CTCs isolated from serial peripheral blood samples of 19 patients with ER(+)/HER2(-) advanced breast cancer receiving everolimus/exemestane.Results:ESR1 methylation was detected in: (i) 25/65 (38.5%) FFPEs, (ii) EpCAM(+) CTC fractions: 26/112 (23.3%) patients and 1/30 (3.3%) HD, and (iii) plasma ctDNA: 8/108 (7.4%) patients and 1/30 (3.3%) HD. ESR1 methylation was highly concordant in 58 paired DNA samples, isolated from CTCs (CellSearch) and corresponding plasma. In serial peripheral blood samples of patients treated with everolimus/exemestane, ESR1 methylation was observed in 10/36 (27.8%) CTC-positive samples, and was associated with lack of response to treatment (P = 0.023, Fisher exact test).Conclusions: We report for the first time the detection of ESR1 methylation in CTCs and a high concordance with paired plasma ctDNA. ESR1 methylation in CTCs was associated with lack of response to everolimus/exemestane regimen. ESR1 methylation should be further evaluated as a potential liquid biopsy-based biomarker. Clin Cancer Res; 24(6); 1500-10. (c)2017 AACR.. Purpose: Liquid biopsy provides real-time monitoring of tumor evolution and response to therapy through analysis of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and plasma-circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). ESR1 epigenetic silencing potentially affects response to endocrine treatment. We evaluated ESR1 methylation in CTCs and paired plasma ctDNA. We evaluated ESR1 methylation in CTCs and paired plasma ctDNA as a potential biomarker for response to everolimus/exemestane treatment.Experimental Design: A highly sensitive and specific real-time MSP assay for ESR1 methylation was developed and validated in (i) 65 primary breast tumors formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE), (ii) EpCAM(+) CTC fractions (122 patients and 30 healthy donors; HD), (iii) plasma ctDNA (108 patients and 30HD), and (iv) in CTCs (CellSearch) and in paired plasma ctDNA for 58 patients with breast cancer. ESR1 methylation status was investigated in CTCs isolated from serial peripheral blood samples of 19 patients with ER(+)/HER2(-) advanced breast cancer receiving everolimus/exemestane.Results:ESR1 methylation was detected in: (i) 25/65 (38.5%) FFPEs, (ii) EpCAM(+) CTC fractions: 26/112 (23.3%) patients and 1/30 (3.3%) HD, and (iii) plasma ctDNA: 8/108 (7.4%) patients and 1/30 (3.3%) HD. ESR1 methylation was highly concordant in 58 paired DNA samples, isolated from CTCs (CellSearch) and corresponding plasma. In serial peripheral blood samples of patients treated with everolimus/exemestane, ESR1 methylation was observed in 10/36 (27.8%) CTC-positive samples, and was associated with lack of response to treatment (P = 0.023, Fisher exact test).Conclusions: We report for the first time the detection of ESR1 methylation in CTCs and a high concordance with paired plasma ctDNA. ESR1 methylation in CTCs was associated with lack of response to everolimus/exemestane regimen. ESR1 methylation should be further evaluated as a potential liquid biopsy-based biomarker. Clin Cancer Res; 24(6); 1500-10. (c)2017 AACR.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive breast cancer subtype with no targeted treatment available. Our previous study identified 38 TNBC-specific genes with altered expression comparing tumour to normal samples. This study aimed to establish whether DNA methylation contributed to these expression changes in the same cohort as well as disease progression from primary breast tumour to lymph node metastasis associated with changes in the epigenome. We obtained DNA from 23 primary TNBC samples, 12 matched lymph node metastases, and 11 matched normal adjacent tissues and assayed for differential methylation profiles using Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChips. The results were validated in an independent cohort of 70 primary TNBC samples. The expression of 16/38 TNBC-specific genes was associated with alteration in DNA methylation. Novel methylation changes between primary tumours and lymph node metastases, as well as those associated with survival were identified. Altered methylation of 18 genes associated with lymph node metastasis were identified and validated. This study reveals the important role DNA methylation plays in altered gene expression of TNBC-specific genes and lymph node metastases. The novel insights into progression of TNBC to secondary disease may provide potential prognostic indicators for this hard-to-treat breast cancer subtype.. Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive breast cancer subtype with no targeted treatment available. Our previous study identified 38 TNBC-specific genes with altered expression comparing tumour to normal samples. This study aimed to establish whether DNA methylation contributed to these expression changes in the same cohort as well as disease progression from primary breast tumour to lymph node metastasis associated with changes in the epigenome. We obtained DNA from 23 primary TNBC samples, 12 matched lymph node metastases, and 11 matched normal adjacent tissues and assayed for differential methylation profiles using Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChips. The results were validated in an independent cohort of 70 primary TNBC samples. The expression of 16/38 TNBC-specific genes was associated with alteration in DNA methylation. Novel methylation changes between primary tumours and lymph node metastases, as well as those associated with survival were identified. Altered methylation of 18 genes associated with lymph node metastasis were identified and validated. This study reveals the important role DNA methylation plays in altered gene expression of TNBC-specific genes and lymph node metastases. The novel insights into progression of TNBC to secondary disease may provide potential prognostic indicators for this hard-to-treat breast cancer subtype.

Breast cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have a crucial role in tumor initiation, metastasis and therapeutic resistance by secreting various growth factors, cytokines, protease and extracellular matrix components. Soluble factors secreted by CAFs are involved in many pathways including inflammation, metabolism, proliferation and epigenetic modulation, suggesting that CAF-dependent reprograming of cancer cells affects a large set of genes. This paracrine signaling has an important role in tumor progression, thus deciphering some of these processes could lead to relevant discoveries with subsequent clinical implications. Here, we investigated the mechanisms underlying the changes in gene expression patterns associated with the cross-talk between breast cancer cells and the stroma. From RNAseq data obtained from breast cancer cell lines grown in presence of CAF-secreted factors, we identified 372 upregulated genes, exhibiting an expression level positively correlated with the stromal content of breast cancer specimens. Furthermore, we observed that gene expression changes were not mediated through significant DNA methylation changes. Nevertheless, CAF-secreted factors but also stromal content of the tumors remarkably activated specific genes characterized by a DNA methylation pattern: hypermethylation at transcription start site and shore regions. Experimental approaches (inhibition of DNA methylation, knockdown of methyl-CpG-binding domain protein 2 and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays) indicated that this set of genes was epigenetically controlled. These data elucidate the importance of epigenetics marks in the cancer cell reprogramming induced by stromal cell and indicated that the interpreters of the DNA methylation signal have a major role in the response of the cancer cells to the microenvironment.. Breast cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) have a crucial role in tumor initiation, metastasis and therapeutic resistance by secreting various growth factors, cytokines, protease and extracellular matrix components. Soluble factors secreted by CAFs are involved in many pathways including inflammation, metabolism, proliferation and epigenetic modulation, suggesting that CAF-dependent reprograming of cancer cells affects a large set of genes. This paracrine signaling has an important role in tumor progression, thus deciphering some of these processes could lead to relevant discoveries with subsequent clinical implications. Here, we investigated the mechanisms underlying the changes in gene expression patterns associated with the cross-talk between breast cancer cells and the stroma. From RNAseq data obtained from breast cancer cell lines grown in presence of CAF-secreted factors, we identified 372 upregulated genes, exhibiting an expression level positively correlated with the stromal content of breast cancer specimens. Furthermore, we observed that gene expression changes were not mediated through significant DNA methylation changes. Nevertheless, CAF-secreted factors but also stromal content of the tumors remarkably activated specific genes characterized by a DNA methylation pattern: hypermethylation at transcription start site and shore regions. Experimental approaches (inhibition of DNA methylation, knockdown of methyl-CpG-binding domain protein 2 and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays) indicated that this set of genes was epigenetically controlled. These data elucidate the importance of epigenetics marks in the cancer cell reprogramming induced by stromal cell and indicated that the interpreters of the DNA methylation signal have a major role in the response of the cancer cells to the microenvironment.

BRCA1 is a tumor suppressor gene that functions in DNA repair. Basal-like tumors are a distinctive subtype of breast cancer defined by gene expression profiles. Hereditary BRCA1 breast tumors and basal-like sporadic tumors have a similar phenotype and gene expression signature, suggesting involvement of BRCA1 in the pathogenesis of sporadic basal-like cancer. This study evaluates the role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast tumorigenesis. BRCA1 protein expression and promoter methylation are compared to tumor histopathology and gene expression profiles. We find BRCA1 protein expression correlates with tumor mitotic rate, consistent with normal cell-cycle regulation of the BRCA1 gene. Methylation is found in 21% of tumors and is associated with lower BRCA1 protein, but not with specific pathologic features. Basal-like tumors, defined by hierarchical clustering of gene expression, have infrequent BRCA1 methylation and high levels of BRCA1 protein expression consistent with their high mitotic rate. Tumors with BRCA1 promoter methylation are present in all expression clusters; however, a subgroup of ER-positive high-grade tumors has a significantly greater number of BRCA1 methylated tumors. Absence of BRCA1 promoter methylation and high levels of BRCA1 expression in basal-like sporadic tumors suggest alternate explanations for the phenotypic similarities of these tumors to hereditary BRCA1 tumors.. BRCA1 is a tumor suppressor gene that functions in DNA repair. Basal-like tumors are a distinctive subtype of breast cancer defined by gene expression profiles. Hereditary BRCA1 breast tumors and basal-like sporadic tumors have a similar phenotype and gene expression signature, suggesting involvement of BRCA1 in the pathogenesis of sporadic basal-like cancer. This study evaluates the role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast tumorigenesis. BRCA1 protein expression and promoter methylation are compared to tumor histopathology and gene expression profiles. We find BRCA1 protein expression correlates with tumor mitotic rate, consistent with normal cell-cycle regulation of the BRCA1 gene. Methylation is found in 21% of tumors and is associated with lower BRCA1 protein, but not with specific pathologic features. Basal-like tumors, defined by hierarchical clustering of gene expression, have infrequent BRCA1 methylation and high levels of BRCA1 protein expression consistent with their high mitotic rate. Tumors with BRCA1 promoter methylation are present in all expression clusters; however, a subgroup of ER-positive high-grade tumors has a significantly greater number of BRCA1 methylated tumors. Absence of BRCA1 promoter methylation and high levels of BRCA1 expression in basal-like sporadic tumors suggest alternate explanations for the phenotypic similarities of these tumors to hereditary BRCA1 tumors.

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the promoter methylation status of SEPT9_v2 in breast cancer and to detect this methylated gene in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in plasma. Bisulfite sequencing was performed with a next generation sequencer. Methylation of the SEPT9_v2 promoter was found in 67% (8/12) of breast cancer cell lines and 53% (10/19) of breast tumor tissue, but not in normal breast tissue (0/19). A clear inverse correlation was observed between the expression of SEPT9_v2 mRNA and the methylation index (MI) both in cell lines and breast cancer tissues. The MI of SEPT9_v2 was significantly higher in non-basal subtype of breast cancer (13.0%, n=84) than in basal subtype (3.0%, n=23) (P<0.0001). Methylated SEPT9_v2 ctDNA in plasma was detected in 11% (9/82) of primary breast cancer patients and 52% (26/50) of metastatic breast cancer patients, but not in the healthy controls (0/51). These results indicate that SEPT9_v2 promoter hypermethylation, which silences the expression of SEPT9_v2 mRNA, is observed in a significant proportion of breast tumors, and that methylated SEPT9_v2 may serve as a novel tumor marker for breast cancer.. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the promoter methylation status of SEPT9_v2 in breast cancer and to detect this methylated gene in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in plasma. Bisulfite sequencing was performed with a next generation sequencer. Methylation of the SEPT9_v2 promoter was found in 67% (8/12) of breast cancer cell lines and 53% (10/19) of breast tumor tissue, but not in normal breast tissue (0/19). A clear inverse correlation was observed between the expression of SEPT9_v2 mRNA and the methylation index (MI) both in cell lines and breast cancer tissues. The MI of SEPT9_v2 was significantly higher in non-basal subtype of breast cancer (13.0%, n=84) than in basal subtype (3.0%, n=23) (P<0.0001). Methylated SEPT9_v2 ctDNA in plasma was detected in 11% (9/82) of primary breast cancer patients and 52% (26/50) of metastatic breast cancer patients, but not in the healthy controls (0/51). These results indicate that SEPT9_v2 promoter hypermethylation, which silences the expression of SEPT9_v2 mRNA, is observed in a significant proportion of breast tumors, and that methylated SEPT9_v2 may serve as a novel tumor marker for breast cancer.

The pathogenesis of bone metastasis is unclear, and much focus in metastatic biology and therapy relays on epigenetic alterations. Since DNA-methyltransferase blockade with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (dAza) counteracts tumour growth, here we utilized dAza to clarify whether molecular events undergoing epigenetic control were critical for bone metastatization. In particular, we investigated the patterns of secreted-protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) and of Endothelin 1, affected by DNA methyltransferases in tumours, with the hypothesis that in bone metastasis a coordinate function of SPARC and Endothelin 1, if any occurs, was orchestrated by DNA methylation. To this purpose, we prepared a xenograft model with the clone 1833, derived from human-MDA-MB231 cells, and dAza administration slowed-down metastasis outgrowth. This seemed consequent to the reductions of SPARC and Endothelin 1 at invasive front and in the bone marrow, mostly due to loss of Twist. In the metastasis bulk Snail, partly reduced by dAza, might sustain Endothelin 1-SPARC cooperativity. Both SPARC and Endothelin 1 underwent post-translational control by miRNAs, a molecular mechanism that might explain the in vivo data. Ectopic miR29a reduced SPARC expression also under long-term dAza exposure, while Endothelin 1 down-regulation occurred in the presence of endogenous-miR98 expression. Notably, dAza effects differed depending on in vivo and in vitro conditions. In 1833 cells exposed to 30-days dAza, SPARC-protein level was practically unaffected, while Endothelin 1 induction depended on the 3'-UTR functionality. The blockade of methyltransferases leading to SPARC reduction in vivo, might represent a promising strategy to hamper early steps of the metastatic process affecting the osteogenic niche.. The pathogenesis of bone metastasis is unclear, and much focus in metastatic biology and therapy relays on epigenetic alterations. Since DNA-methyltransferase blockade with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (dAza) counteracts tumour growth, here we utilized dAza to clarify whether molecular events undergoing epigenetic control were critical for bone metastatization. In particular, we investigated the patterns of secreted-protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) and of Endothelin 1, affected by DNA methyltransferases in tumours, with the hypothesis that in bone metastasis a coordinate function of SPARC and Endothelin 1, if any occurs, was orchestrated by DNA methylation. To this purpose, we prepared a xenograft model with the clone 1833, derived from human-MDA-MB231 cells, and dAza administration slowed-down metastasis outgrowth. This seemed consequent to the reductions of SPARC and Endothelin 1 at invasive front and in the bone marrow, mostly due to loss of Twist. In the metastasis bulk Snail, partly reduced by dAza, might sustain Endothelin 1-SPARC cooperativity. Both SPARC and Endothelin 1 underwent post-translational control by miRNAs, a molecular mechanism that might explain the in vivo data. Ectopic miR29a reduced SPARC expression also under long-term dAza exposure, while Endothelin 1 down-regulation occurred in the presence of endogenous-miR98 expression. Notably, dAza effects differed depending on in vivo and in vitro conditions. In 1833 cells exposed to 30-days dAza, SPARC-protein level was practically unaffected, while Endothelin 1 induction depended on the 3'-UTR functionality. The blockade of methyltransferases leading to SPARC reduction in vivo, might represent a promising strategy to hamper early steps of the metastatic process affecting the osteogenic niche.

We investigated the involvement of Hippo-related pathways in bone metastasis from breast cancer, by evaluating E-cadherin expression downstream of WWdomain-containing oxidoreductase (Wwox) and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ). These nuclear effectors functioned in a context-specific fashion on transcriptome, depending on breast-cancer aggressiveness and methylation state. Wwox and E-cadherin were found in human specimens of bone metastasis but not in primary-ductal breast carcinoma, while TAZ showed a characteristic localisation in metastasis nuclei. Wwox and E-cadherin were higher in 1833-metastatic clone with bone avidity than in parental-MDA-MB231 cells, while only metastatic cells presented TAZ. In 1833 cells, a complex interplay of transcriptional signalling controlled E-cadherin transactivation. Wwox and TAZ activated Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) binding to E-cadherin promoter, while Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) intervened in E-cadherin transactivation favouring and preventing Wwox and TAZ functions, respectively. Methylation impinged on Hippo-related pathways through Wwox and TAZ, modifying metastatic phenotype. The protract exposure to 5-azacytidine (Aza), by affecting methylation state modified the shape of 1833 cells, becoming mesenchymal as that of MDA-MB231 cells and reduced spontaneous-Matrigel invasion. The underlying-molecular mechanisms were diminutions of E-cadherin, Wwox, matrix metalloproteases 2 and 9, HIF-1- and PPARgamma-activities, inversely correlated to Snail and nuclear-TAZ accumulations. Exogenous WWOX restored 1833-Aza invasion. Thus, 1833-Aza cells permitted to study the role played by methylation in metastasis plasticity, being E-cadherin loss part of an entire-gene reprogramming. Of note, bone-metastasis formation in 1833-Aza xenograft was partially impaired, prolonging mice survival. In conclusion, the methylation-heritable changes seemed important for cancer progression to establish bone metastasis engraftment/growth, by affecting steps requiring homotipic and/or heterotypic-adhesive properties and matrix degradation.. We investigated the involvement of Hippo-related pathways in bone metastasis from breast cancer, by evaluating E-cadherin expression downstream of WWdomain-containing oxidoreductase (Wwox) and transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ). These nuclear effectors functioned in a context-specific fashion on transcriptome, depending on breast-cancer aggressiveness and methylation state. Wwox and E-cadherin were found in human specimens of bone metastasis but not in primary-ductal breast carcinoma, while TAZ showed a characteristic localisation in metastasis nuclei. Wwox and E-cadherin were higher in 1833-metastatic clone with bone avidity than in parental-MDA-MB231 cells, while only metastatic cells presented TAZ. In 1833 cells, a complex interplay of transcriptional signalling controlled E-cadherin transactivation. Wwox and TAZ activated Hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) binding to E-cadherin promoter, while Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) intervened in E-cadherin transactivation favouring and preventing Wwox and TAZ functions, respectively. Methylation impinged on Hippo-related pathways through Wwox and TAZ, modifying metastatic phenotype. The protract exposure to 5-azacytidine (Aza), by affecting methylation state modified the shape of 1833 cells, becoming mesenchymal as that of MDA-MB231 cells and reduced spontaneous-Matrigel invasion. The underlying-molecular mechanisms were diminutions of E-cadherin, Wwox, matrix metalloproteases 2 and 9, HIF-1- and PPARgamma-activities, inversely correlated to Snail and nuclear-TAZ accumulations. Exogenous WWOX restored 1833-Aza invasion. Thus, 1833-Aza cells permitted to study the role played by methylation in metastasis plasticity, being E-cadherin loss part of an entire-gene reprogramming. Of note, bone-metastasis formation in 1833-Aza xenograft was partially impaired, prolonging mice survival. In conclusion, the methylation-heritable changes seemed important for cancer progression to establish bone metastasis engraftment/growth, by affecting steps requiring homotipic and/or heterotypic-adhesive properties and matrix degradation.

Mechanisms underlying the poor breast cancer prognosis among obese women are unresolved. DNA methylation levels are linked to obesity and to breast cancer survival. We hypothesized that obesity may work in conjunction with the epigenome to alter prognosis. Using a population-based sample of women diagnosed with first primary breast cancer, we examined modification of the obesity-mortality association by DNA methylation. In-person interviews were conducted approximately 3 months after diagnosis. Weight and height were assessed [to estimate body mass index (BMI)], and blood samples collected. Promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes was assessed in archived tumor by methylation-specific PCR and Methyl Light. Global methylation in white blood cell DNA was assessed by analysis of long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1) and with the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA). Vital status among 1308 patients (with any methylation biomarker and complete BMI assessment) was determined after approximately 15 years of follow-up (N = 194/441 deaths due to breast cancer-specific/all-cause mortality). We used Cox proportional hazards regression to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) using two-sided p values of 0.05. Breast cancer-specific mortality was higher among obese (BMI >/= 30) patients with promoter methylation in APC (HR = 2.47; 95 % CI = 1.43-4.27) and TWIST1 (HR = 4.25; 95 % CI = 1.43-12.70) in breast cancer tissue. Estimates were similar, but less pronounced, for all-cause mortality. Increased all-cause (HR = 1.81; 95 % CI = 1.19-2.74) and breast cancer-specific (HR = 2.61; 95 % CI = 1.45-4.69) mortality was observed among obese patients with the lowest LUMA levels. The poor breast cancer prognosis associated with obesity may depend on methylation profiles, which warrants further investigation.. Mechanisms underlying the poor breast cancer prognosis among obese women are unresolved. DNA methylation levels are linked to obesity and to breast cancer survival. We hypothesized that obesity may work in conjunction with the epigenome to alter prognosis. Using a population-based sample of women diagnosed with first primary breast cancer, we examined modification of the obesity-mortality association by DNA methylation. In-person interviews were conducted approximately 3 months after diagnosis. Weight and height were assessed [to estimate body mass index (BMI)], and blood samples collected. Promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes was assessed in archived tumor by methylation-specific PCR and Methyl Light. Global methylation in white blood cell DNA was assessed by analysis of long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1) and with the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA). Vital status among 1308 patients (with any methylation biomarker and complete BMI assessment) was determined after approximately 15 years of follow-up (N = 194/441 deaths due to breast cancer-specific/all-cause mortality). We used Cox proportional hazards regression to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) using two-sided p values of 0.05. Breast cancer-specific mortality was higher among obese (BMI >/= 30) patients with promoter methylation in APC (HR = 2.47; 95 % CI = 1.43-4.27) and TWIST1 (HR = 4.25; 95 % CI = 1.43-12.70) in breast cancer tissue. Estimates were similar, but less pronounced, for all-cause mortality. Increased all-cause (HR = 1.81; 95 % CI = 1.19-2.74) and breast cancer-specific (HR = 2.61; 95 % CI = 1.45-4.69) mortality was observed among obese patients with the lowest LUMA levels. The poor breast cancer prognosis associated with obesity may depend on methylation profiles, which warrants further investigation.

BACKGROUND: Mechanisms underlying the inverse association between physical activity and survival after breast cancer are unresolved, but DNA methylation may play a role. We hypothesized that promoter methylation of breast cancer-related genes, as well as global methylation, may modify the association between prediagnostic recreational physical activity (RPA) and breast cancer mortality. METHODS: Using a population-based sample of 1254 women diagnosed with first primary breast cancer, we examined modification of the RPA-mortality association by gene-specific promoter methylation and global methylation. Average lifetime RPA was assessed from menarche to diagnosis through structured in-home interviews. Promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes was evaluated in archived tumor by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and MethyLight assay. Global methylation in white blood cell DNA was determined at long interspersed nucleotide element 1 and by the luminometric methylation assay. After approximately 15 years of follow-up, 486 patients had died, and 186 of the deaths were breast cancer-related. We used Cox proportional hazards regression to estimate HRs and 95% CIs as well as likelihood ratio tests to assess multiplicative interactions. RESULTS: All-cause mortality was lower only among physically active women with methylated promoter of APC (HR 0.60, 95% CI 0.40-0.80), CCND2 (HR 0.56, 95% CI 0.32-0.99), HIN (HR 0.55, 95% CI 0.38-0.80), and TWIST1 (HR 0.28, 95% CI 0.14-0.56) in tumors, but not among those with unmethylated tumors (significant interaction p < 0.05). We found no interaction between RPA and global methylation. CONCLUSIONS: The improved survival after breast cancer that is associated with RPA may be more pronounced in women with promoter tumor methylation in biologically plausible genes.. BACKGROUND: Mechanisms underlying the inverse association between physical activity and survival after breast cancer are unresolved, but DNA methylation may play a role. We hypothesized that promoter methylation of breast cancer-related genes, as well as global methylation, may modify the association between prediagnostic recreational physical activity (RPA) and breast cancer mortality. METHODS: Using a population-based sample of 1254 women diagnosed with first primary breast cancer, we examined modification of the RPA-mortality association by gene-specific promoter methylation and global methylation. Average lifetime RPA was assessed from menarche to diagnosis through structured in-home interviews. Promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes was evaluated in archived tumor by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction and MethyLight assay. Global methylation in white blood cell DNA was determined at long interspersed nucleotide element 1 and by the luminometric methylation assay. After approximately 15 years of follow-up, 486 patients had died, and 186 of the deaths were breast cancer-related. We used Cox proportional hazards regression to estimate HRs and 95% CIs as well as likelihood ratio tests to assess multiplicative interactions. RESULTS: All-cause mortality was lower only among physically active women with methylated promoter of APC (HR 0.60, 95% CI 0.40-0.80), CCND2 (HR 0.56, 95% CI 0.32-0.99), HIN (HR 0.55, 95% CI 0.38-0.80), and TWIST1 (HR 0.28, 95% CI 0.14-0.56) in tumors, but not among those with unmethylated tumors (significant interaction p < 0.05). We found no interaction between RPA and global methylation. CONCLUSIONS: The improved survival after breast cancer that is associated with RPA may be more pronounced in women with promoter tumor methylation in biologically plausible genes.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer, the leading cancer diagnosis among American women, is positively associated with postmenopausal obesity and little or no recreational physical activity (RPA). However, the underlying mechanisms of these associations remain unresolved. Aberrant changes in DNA methylation may represent an early event in carcinogenesis, but few studies have investigated associations between obesity/RPA and gene methylation, particularly in postmenopausal breast tumors where these lifestyle factors are most relevant. METHODS: We used case-case unconditional logistic regression to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the associations between body mass index (BMI=weight [kg]/height [m(2)]) in the year prior to diagnosis, or RPA (average hours/week), and methylation status (methylated vs. unmethylated) of 13 breast cancer-related genes in 532 postmenopausal breast tumor samples from the Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. We also explored whether the association between BMI/RPA and estrogen/progesterone-receptor status (ER+PR+ vs. all others) was differential with respect to gene methylation status. Methylation-specific PCR and the MethyLight assay were used to assess gene methylation. RESULTS: BMI 25-29.9kg/m(2), and perhaps BMI>/=30kg/m(2), was associated with methylated HIN1 in breast tumor tissue. Cases with BMI>/=30kg/m(2) were more likely to have ER+PR+ breast tumors in the presence of unmethylated ESR1 (OR=2.63, 95% CI 1.32-5.25) and women with high RPA were more likely to have ER+PR+ breast tumors with methylated GSTP1 (OR=2.33, 95% CI 0.79-6.84). DISCUSSION: While biologically plausible, our findings that BMI is associated with methylated HIN1 and BMI/RPA are associated with ER+PR+ breast tumors in the presence of unmethylated ESR1 and methylated GSTP1, respectively, warrant further investigation. Future studies would benefit from enrolling greater numbers of postmenopausal women and examining a larger panel of breast cancer-related genes.. INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer, the leading cancer diagnosis among American women, is positively associated with postmenopausal obesity and little or no recreational physical activity (RPA). However, the underlying mechanisms of these associations remain unresolved. Aberrant changes in DNA methylation may represent an early event in carcinogenesis, but few studies have investigated associations between obesity/RPA and gene methylation, particularly in postmenopausal breast tumors where these lifestyle factors are most relevant. METHODS: We used case-case unconditional logistic regression to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the associations between body mass index (BMI=weight [kg]/height [m(2)]) in the year prior to diagnosis, or RPA (average hours/week), and methylation status (methylated vs. unmethylated) of 13 breast cancer-related genes in 532 postmenopausal breast tumor samples from the Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. We also explored whether the association between BMI/RPA and estrogen/progesterone-receptor status (ER+PR+ vs. all others) was differential with respect to gene methylation status. Methylation-specific PCR and the MethyLight assay were used to assess gene methylation. RESULTS: BMI 25-29.9kg/m(2), and perhaps BMI>/=30kg/m(2), was associated with methylated HIN1 in breast tumor tissue. Cases with BMI>/=30kg/m(2) were more likely to have ER+PR+ breast tumors in the presence of unmethylated ESR1 (OR=2.63, 95% CI 1.32-5.25) and women with high RPA were more likely to have ER+PR+ breast tumors with methylated GSTP1 (OR=2.33, 95% CI 0.79-6.84). DISCUSSION: While biologically plausible, our findings that BMI is associated with methylated HIN1 and BMI/RPA are associated with ER+PR+ breast tumors in the presence of unmethylated ESR1 and methylated GSTP1, respectively, warrant further investigation. Future studies would benefit from enrolling greater numbers of postmenopausal women and examining a larger panel of breast cancer-related genes.

INTRODUCTION: Little is known about how modifiable lifestyle factors interact with the epigenome to influence disease. Body mass index (BMI, weight kg/height m2) and physical activity are associated with postmenopausal breast cancer, but the mechanisms are not well-understood. We hypothesized that BMI or physical activity may modify the association between markers of global DNA methylation and postmenopausal breast cancer risk. METHODS: Resources from a population-based case-control study (~1300 postmenopausal women) were used to construct logistic regression models. We explored whether the association between breast cancer and global methylation, assessed using the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA) and long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1) methylation in white blood cell DNA, was modified by BMI or recreational physical activity (RPA). RESULTS: The LUMA-breast cancer association was modified by BMI (multiplicative p=0.03) and RPA (p=0.004). Non-obese women in the highest quartile of LUMA experienced a greater than two-fold increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer (BMI<25kg/m2: OR=2.16; 95% CI=1.35, 3.57 and BMI 25-29.9kg/m2: OR=2.96; 95% CI=1.69, 5.19) compared to women in the lowest LUMA quartile. Similar increases in the LUMA-breast cancer association were observed among women who were physically active (moderate RPA: OR=2.62; 95% CI=1.44, 4.75 and high RPA: OR=2.62; 95% CI=1.53, 4.49). Estimates among obese and inactive women were less pronounced and imprecise. Although we observed statistical interactions (p<0.05) between BMI and RPA with LINE-1, we were unable to discern any clear associations with breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: The association between LUMA and postmenopausal breast cancer risk may be modified by postmenopausal body size and physical activity.. INTRODUCTION: Little is known about how modifiable lifestyle factors interact with the epigenome to influence disease. Body mass index (BMI, weight kg/height m2) and physical activity are associated with postmenopausal breast cancer, but the mechanisms are not well-understood. We hypothesized that BMI or physical activity may modify the association between markers of global DNA methylation and postmenopausal breast cancer risk. METHODS: Resources from a population-based case-control study (~1300 postmenopausal women) were used to construct logistic regression models. We explored whether the association between breast cancer and global methylation, assessed using the luminometric methylation assay (LUMA) and long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1) methylation in white blood cell DNA, was modified by BMI or recreational physical activity (RPA). RESULTS: The LUMA-breast cancer association was modified by BMI (multiplicative p=0.03) and RPA (p=0.004). Non-obese women in the highest quartile of LUMA experienced a greater than two-fold increased risk of postmenopausal breast cancer (BMI<25kg/m2: OR=2.16; 95% CI=1.35, 3.57 and BMI 25-29.9kg/m2: OR=2.96; 95% CI=1.69, 5.19) compared to women in the lowest LUMA quartile. Similar increases in the LUMA-breast cancer association were observed among women who were physically active (moderate RPA: OR=2.62; 95% CI=1.44, 4.75 and high RPA: OR=2.62; 95% CI=1.53, 4.49). Estimates among obese and inactive women were less pronounced and imprecise. Although we observed statistical interactions (p<0.05) between BMI and RPA with LINE-1, we were unable to discern any clear associations with breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: The association between LUMA and postmenopausal breast cancer risk may be modified by postmenopausal body size and physical activity.

Previous studies revealed that some bioactive food components have anti-cancer effects. However epigenetic effects of dietary compound resveratrol are largely unknown in breast cancer cells (M.A. Dawson, T. Kouzarides, 2012) [1]. Here we provide novel data and comparisons of DNA methylation status of promoter gene regions in response to resveratrol treatment at 24 h and 48 h versus untreated MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. DNA methylation changes were measured using Array-PRIMES method (aPRIMES) followed by whole-genome hybridization using human DNA methylation promoter microarray NimbleGen HG18 Refseq Promoter 3x720 K array. Our data were associated to corresponding changes in mRNA expression in a set of cancer-related genes. Using gene ontology analysis we also identify cancer-related cellular processes and pathways that can be epigenetically reprogramed by resveratrol. Data in this article are associated to the research articles "Methylation Landscape of Human Breast Cancer Cells in Response to Dietary Compound Resveratrol". Medina Aguilar et al., PLoS ONE 11(6): e0157866. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0157866 2016 (A.R. Medina, P.C. Perez, L.A. Marchat, P. Gariglio, M.J. Garcia, C.S. Rodriguez, G.E. Ruiz, et al., 2016) [2]; and "Resveratrol inhibits cell cycle progression by targeting Aurora kinase A and Polo-like kinase 1 in breast cancer cells" in Oncology Reports. Medina Aguilar et al., 2016 Jun; 35(6):3696-704. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4728 (A.R. Medina, P. Gariglio, M.J. Garcia, O.E. Arechaga, S.N. Villegas, C.M. Martinez et al., 2016) [3].. Previous studies revealed that some bioactive food components have anti-cancer effects. However epigenetic effects of dietary compound resveratrol are largely unknown in breast cancer cells (M.A. Dawson, T. Kouzarides, 2012) [1]. Here we provide novel data and comparisons of DNA methylation status of promoter gene regions in response to resveratrol treatment at 24 h and 48 h versus untreated MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. DNA methylation changes were measured using Array-PRIMES method (aPRIMES) followed by whole-genome hybridization using human DNA methylation promoter microarray NimbleGen HG18 Refseq Promoter 3x720 K array. Our data were associated to corresponding changes in mRNA expression in a set of cancer-related genes. Using gene ontology analysis we also identify cancer-related cellular processes and pathways that can be epigenetically reprogramed by resveratrol. Data in this article are associated to the research articles "Methylation Landscape of Human Breast Cancer Cells in Response to Dietary Compound Resveratrol". Medina Aguilar et al., PLoS ONE 11(6): e0157866. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0157866 2016 (A.R. Medina, P.C. Perez, L.A. Marchat, P. Gariglio, M.J. Garcia, C.S. Rodriguez, G.E. Ruiz, et al., 2016) [2]; and "Resveratrol inhibits cell cycle progression by targeting Aurora kinase A and Polo-like kinase 1 in breast cancer cells" in Oncology Reports. Medina Aguilar et al., 2016 Jun; 35(6):3696-704. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4728 (A.R. Medina, P. Gariglio, M.J. Garcia, O.E. Arechaga, S.N. Villegas, C.M. Martinez et al., 2016) [3].

Aberrant DNA methylation is a frequent epigenetic alteration in cancer cells that has emerged as a pivotal mechanism for tumorigenesis. Accordingly, novel therapies targeting the epigenome are being explored with the aim to restore normal DNA methylation patterns on oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. A limited number of studies indicate that dietary compound resveratrol modulates DNA methylation of several cancer-related genes; however a complete view of changes in methylome by resveratrol has not been reported yet. In this study we performed a genome-wide survey of DNA methylation signatures in triple negative breast cancer cells exposed to resveratrol. Our data showed that resveratrol treatment for 24 h and 48 h decreased gene promoter hypermethylation and increased DNA hypomethylation. Of 2476 hypermethylated genes in control cells, 1,459 and 1,547 were differentially hypomethylated after 24 h and 48 h, respectively. Remarkably, resveratrol did not induce widespread non-specific DNA hyper- or hypomethylation as changes in methylation were found in only 12.5% of 27,728 CpG loci. Moreover, resveratrol restores the hypomethylated and hypermethylated status of key tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes, respectively. Importantly, the integrative analysis of methylome and transcriptome profiles in response to resveratrol showed that methylation alterations were concordant with changes in mRNA expression. Our findings reveal for the first time the impact of resveratrol on the methylome of breast cancer cells and identify novel potential targets for epigenetic therapy. We propose that resveratrol may be considered as a dietary epidrug as it may exert its anti-tumor activities by modifying the methylation status of cancer -related genes which deserves further in vivo characterization.. Aberrant DNA methylation is a frequent epigenetic alteration in cancer cells that has emerged as a pivotal mechanism for tumorigenesis. Accordingly, novel therapies targeting the epigenome are being explored with the aim to restore normal DNA methylation patterns on oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. A limited number of studies indicate that dietary compound resveratrol modulates DNA methylation of several cancer-related genes; however a complete view of changes in methylome by resveratrol has not been reported yet. In this study we performed a genome-wide survey of DNA methylation signatures in triple negative breast cancer cells exposed to resveratrol. Our data showed that resveratrol treatment for 24 h and 48 h decreased gene promoter hypermethylation and increased DNA hypomethylation. Of 2476 hypermethylated genes in control cells, 1,459 and 1,547 were differentially hypomethylated after 24 h and 48 h, respectively. Remarkably, resveratrol did not induce widespread non-specific DNA hyper- or hypomethylation as changes in methylation were found in only 12.5% of 27,728 CpG loci. Moreover, resveratrol restores the hypomethylated and hypermethylated status of key tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes, respectively. Importantly, the integrative analysis of methylome and transcriptome profiles in response to resveratrol showed that methylation alterations were concordant with changes in mRNA expression. Our findings reveal for the first time the impact of resveratrol on the methylome of breast cancer cells and identify novel potential targets for epigenetic therapy. We propose that resveratrol may be considered as a dietary epidrug as it may exert its anti-tumor activities by modifying the methylation status of cancer -related genes which deserves further in vivo characterization.

The aim of this work was to analyze methylation of the promoter sites of the ESR1 and PGR genes and to determine correlations with immunohistochemical expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors in ductal and lobular breast cancers. An observational, descriptive, molecular study was conducted on 20 ductal and 20 lobular breast cancer samples with immunohistochemical determination of estrogen and progesterone receptor expression. The methylation analysis of ESR1 and PGR promoter sites was carried-out by methylation-specific PCR. For correlation analysis, Kendall's tau coefficient was determined. Positive correlations were found between estrogen and progesterone receptors, estrogen receptor and unmethylated progesterone receptor, progesterone receptor, and unmethylated progesterone receptor. Negative correlations were found between estrogen receptor and methylated progesterone receptor, progesterone receptor and methylated progesterone receptor, methylated and unmethylated estrogen receptor, and methylated and unmethylated progesterone receptor. The results suggest that methylation of promoter sites of ESR1 and PGR is a relatively uncommon event in ductal and lobular breast cancer, and also suggest that the determination of epigenetic states of ESR1 and PGR could represent an alternative or complement to the histopathological expression analysis.. The aim of this work was to analyze methylation of the promoter sites of the ESR1 and PGR genes and to determine correlations with immunohistochemical expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors in ductal and lobular breast cancers. An observational, descriptive, molecular study was conducted on 20 ductal and 20 lobular breast cancer samples with immunohistochemical determination of estrogen and progesterone receptor expression. The methylation analysis of ESR1 and PGR promoter sites was carried-out by methylation-specific PCR. For correlation analysis, Kendall's tau coefficient was determined. Positive correlations were found between estrogen and progesterone receptors, estrogen receptor and unmethylated progesterone receptor, progesterone receptor, and unmethylated progesterone receptor. Negative correlations were found between estrogen receptor and methylated progesterone receptor, progesterone receptor and methylated progesterone receptor, methylated and unmethylated estrogen receptor, and methylated and unmethylated progesterone receptor. The results suggest that methylation of promoter sites of ESR1 and PGR is a relatively uncommon event in ductal and lobular breast cancer, and also suggest that the determination of epigenetic states of ESR1 and PGR could represent an alternative or complement to the histopathological expression analysis.

PURPOSE: To provide a molecular rationale for negative prognostic factors more prevalent in African-American (AA) than Caucasian (Cau) women, we investigated the frequency of promoter hypermethylation in invasive ductal breast cancers in the two races. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: HIN-1, Twist, Cyclin D2, RAR-beta, and RASSF1A were analyzed in DNA from 67 AA and 44 Cau invasive ductal breast cancers, stratified by age and estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status, by methylation-specific PCR. Hierarchical multiple logistic regression analysis was applied to determine estimated probabilities of methylation. Expression of HIN-1 mRNA was analyzed by in situ hybridization and quantitative reverse transcribed PCR. RESULTS: Significant differences between races were observed in the ER-/PR-, age < 50 subgroup; AA tumors had higher frequency of methylation (P < 0.001) in four of five genes as compared with Cau and also a higher prevalence (80 versus 0%; P < 0.005) of three or more methylated genes per tumor. No differences in gene methylation patterns were observed across the two races for ER+/PR+ tumors in all ages and ER-/PR- tumors in age > 50. ER+/PR+ status was associated with higher frequency of methylation in Cau tumors of all ages but only with the age > 50 subgroup in AA. Frequent Cyclin D2 methylation was significantly associated (P = 0.01) with shorter survival time. CONCLUSION: ER-/PR-, age < 50 tumors in AA women, have a significantly higher frequency of hypermethylation than in those of Cau women. Comparative studies, such as these, could provide a molecular basis for differences in tumor progression and pathology seen in the two races.. PURPOSE: To provide a molecular rationale for negative prognostic factors more prevalent in African-American (AA) than Caucasian (Cau) women, we investigated the frequency of promoter hypermethylation in invasive ductal breast cancers in the two races. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: HIN-1, Twist, Cyclin D2, RAR-beta, and RASSF1A were analyzed in DNA from 67 AA and 44 Cau invasive ductal breast cancers, stratified by age and estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor (ER/PR) status, by methylation-specific PCR. Hierarchical multiple logistic regression analysis was applied to determine estimated probabilities of methylation. Expression of HIN-1 mRNA was analyzed by in situ hybridization and quantitative reverse transcribed PCR. RESULTS: Significant differences between races were observed in the ER-/PR-, age < 50 subgroup; AA tumors had higher frequency of methylation (P < 0.001) in four of five genes as compared with Cau and also a higher prevalence (80 versus 0%; P < 0.005) of three or more methylated genes per tumor. No differences in gene methylation patterns were observed across the two races for ER+/PR+ tumors in all ages and ER-/PR- tumors in age > 50. ER+/PR+ status was associated with higher frequency of methylation in Cau tumors of all ages but only with the age > 50 subgroup in AA. Frequent Cyclin D2 methylation was significantly associated (P = 0.01) with shorter survival time. CONCLUSION: ER-/PR-, age < 50 tumors in AA women, have a significantly higher frequency of hypermethylation than in those of Cau women. Comparative studies, such as these, could provide a molecular basis for differences in tumor progression and pathology seen in the two races.

LCN2 (Lipocalin 2) is a 25 KD secreted acute phase protein, reported to be a novel regulator of angiogenesis in breast cancer. Up regulation of LCN2 had been observed in multiple cancers including breast cancer, pancreatic cancer and ovarian cancer. However, the role of LCN2 promoter methylation in the formation of microvessels is poorly understood. The aim of this study was to analyze the association of LCN 2 promoter methylation with microvessel formation and tumor cell proliferation in breast cancer patients. The LCN2 promoter methylation status was studied in 64 breast cancer tumors by methylation specific PCR (MSP). Evaluation of microvessel density (MVD) and Ki67 cell proliferation index was achieved by immunohistochemical staining using CD34 and MIB-1 antibodies, respectively. LCN2 promoter unmethylation status was observed in 43 (67.2%) of breast cancer patients whereas LCN2 methylation status was seen in 21 (32.8%). Further, LCN2 promoter unmethylation status was associated with aggressive tumor phenotype and elevated mean MVD in breast cancer patients.. LCN2 (Lipocalin 2) is a 25 KD secreted acute phase protein, reported to be a novel regulator of angiogenesis in breast cancer. Up regulation of LCN2 had been observed in multiple cancers including breast cancer, pancreatic cancer and ovarian cancer. However, the role of LCN2 promoter methylation in the formation of microvessels is poorly understood. The aim of this study was to analyze the association of LCN 2 promoter methylation with microvessel formation and tumor cell proliferation in breast cancer patients. The LCN2 promoter methylation status was studied in 64 breast cancer tumors by methylation specific PCR (MSP). Evaluation of microvessel density (MVD) and Ki67 cell proliferation index was achieved by immunohistochemical staining using CD34 and MIB-1 antibodies, respectively. LCN2 promoter unmethylation status was observed in 43 (67.2%) of breast cancer patients whereas LCN2 methylation status was seen in 21 (32.8%). Further, LCN2 promoter unmethylation status was associated with aggressive tumor phenotype and elevated mean MVD in breast cancer patients.

Abnormal DNA methylation is well established for cancer cells, but a methylation-based diagnostic test is yet to be developed. One of the problems is insufficient accuracy of cancer detection in heterogeneous clinical specimens when only a single gene is analyzed. A new technique was developed to produce a multigene methylation signature in each sample, and its potential for selection of informative genes was tested using DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues. Fifty-six promoters were analyzed in each of 138 clinical specimens by a microarray-based modification of the previously developed technique. Specific methylation signatures were identified for atypical ductal hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma in situ, and invasive ductal carcinoma. Informative promoters selected by Fisher's exact test were used for composite biomarker design using naive Bayes algorithm. All informative promoters were unmethylated in disease compared with normal tissue. Cross-validation showed 72.4% sensitivity and 74.7% specificity for detection of ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma, and 87.5% sensitivity and 95% specificity for detection of atypical ductal hyperplasia. These results indicate that informative cancer-specific methylation signatures can be detected in heterogeneous tissue specimens, suggesting that a diagnostic assay can then be developed.. Abnormal DNA methylation is well established for cancer cells, but a methylation-based diagnostic test is yet to be developed. One of the problems is insufficient accuracy of cancer detection in heterogeneous clinical specimens when only a single gene is analyzed. A new technique was developed to produce a multigene methylation signature in each sample, and its potential for selection of informative genes was tested using DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissues. Fifty-six promoters were analyzed in each of 138 clinical specimens by a microarray-based modification of the previously developed technique. Specific methylation signatures were identified for atypical ductal hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma in situ, and invasive ductal carcinoma. Informative promoters selected by Fisher's exact test were used for composite biomarker design using naive Bayes algorithm. All informative promoters were unmethylated in disease compared with normal tissue. Cross-validation showed 72.4% sensitivity and 74.7% specificity for detection of ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma, and 87.5% sensitivity and 95% specificity for detection of atypical ductal hyperplasia. These results indicate that informative cancer-specific methylation signatures can be detected in heterogeneous tissue specimens, suggesting that a diagnostic assay can then be developed.

Alterations in the epigenetic landscape are fundamental drivers of aberrant gene expression that contribute to cancer progression and pathology. Understanding specific modes of epigenetic regulation can be used to identify novel biomarkers or targets for therapeutic intervention to clinically treat solid tumors and leukemias. The bivalent marking of gene promoters by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 is a primary mechanism to poise genes for expression in pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESC). In this study we interrogated three well-established mammary cell lines to model epigenetic programming observed among breast cancer subtypes. Evidence is provided for a distinct bivalent signature, activating and repressive histone marks co-residing at the same gene promoter, in the MCF7 (ESR/PGR+) luminal breast cancer cell line. We identified a subset of genes, enriched for developmental pathways that regulate cellular phenotype and signaling, and partially recapitulate the bivalent character observed in ESC. We validated the biological relevance of this "oncofetal epigenetic" signature using data from ESR/PGR+ tumor samples from breast cancer patients. This signature of oncofetal epigenetic control is an informative biomarker and may provide novel therapeutic targets, selective for both recurring and treatment-resistant cancers. J. Cell. Physiol. 231: 2474-2481, 2016. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.. Alterations in the epigenetic landscape are fundamental drivers of aberrant gene expression that contribute to cancer progression and pathology. Understanding specific modes of epigenetic regulation can be used to identify novel biomarkers or targets for therapeutic intervention to clinically treat solid tumors and leukemias. The bivalent marking of gene promoters by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 is a primary mechanism to poise genes for expression in pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESC). In this study we interrogated three well-established mammary cell lines to model epigenetic programming observed among breast cancer subtypes. Evidence is provided for a distinct bivalent signature, activating and repressive histone marks co-residing at the same gene promoter, in the MCF7 (ESR/PGR+) luminal breast cancer cell line. We identified a subset of genes, enriched for developmental pathways that regulate cellular phenotype and signaling, and partially recapitulate the bivalent character observed in ESC. We validated the biological relevance of this "oncofetal epigenetic" signature using data from ESR/PGR+ tumor samples from breast cancer patients. This signature of oncofetal epigenetic control is an informative biomarker and may provide novel therapeutic targets, selective for both recurring and treatment-resistant cancers. J. Cell. Physiol. 231: 2474-2481, 2016. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

The onset and progression of breast cancer are linked to genetic and epigenetic changes that alter the normal programming of cells. Epigenetic modifications of DNA and histones contribute to chromatin structure that result in the activation or repression of gene expression. Several epigenetic pathways have been shown to be highly deregulated in cancer cells. Targeting specific histone modifications represents a viable strategy to prevent oncogenic transformation, tumor growth or metastasis. Methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 has been extensively studied and shown to mark genes for expression; however this residue can also be acetylated and the specific function of this alteration is less well known. To define the relative roles of histone H3 methylation (H3K4me3) and acetylation (H3K4ac) in breast cancer, we determined genomic regions enriched for both marks in normal-like (MCF10A), transformed (MCF7) and metastatic (MDA-MB-231) cells using a genome-wide ChIP-Seq approach. Our data revealed a genome-wide gain of H3K4ac associated with both early and late breast cancer cell phenotypes, while gain of H3K4me3 was predominantly associated with late stage cancer cells. Enrichment of H3K4ac was over-represented at promoters of genes associated with cancer-related phenotypic traits, such as estrogen response and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition pathways. Our findings highlight an important role for H3K4ac in predicting epigenetic changes associated with early stages of transformation. In addition, our data provide a valuable resource for understanding epigenetic signatures that correlate with known breast cancer-associated oncogenic pathways.. The onset and progression of breast cancer are linked to genetic and epigenetic changes that alter the normal programming of cells. Epigenetic modifications of DNA and histones contribute to chromatin structure that result in the activation or repression of gene expression. Several epigenetic pathways have been shown to be highly deregulated in cancer cells. Targeting specific histone modifications represents a viable strategy to prevent oncogenic transformation, tumor growth or metastasis. Methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 has been extensively studied and shown to mark genes for expression; however this residue can also be acetylated and the specific function of this alteration is less well known. To define the relative roles of histone H3 methylation (H3K4me3) and acetylation (H3K4ac) in breast cancer, we determined genomic regions enriched for both marks in normal-like (MCF10A), transformed (MCF7) and metastatic (MDA-MB-231) cells using a genome-wide ChIP-Seq approach. Our data revealed a genome-wide gain of H3K4ac associated with both early and late breast cancer cell phenotypes, while gain of H3K4me3 was predominantly associated with late stage cancer cells. Enrichment of H3K4ac was over-represented at promoters of genes associated with cancer-related phenotypic traits, such as estrogen response and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition pathways. Our findings highlight an important role for H3K4ac in predicting epigenetic changes associated with early stages of transformation. In addition, our data provide a valuable resource for understanding epigenetic signatures that correlate with known breast cancer-associated oncogenic pathways.

. 
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to determine the concordance of promoter methylation of stratifin, ERalpha and PR in tumor and circulating DNA in breast cancer patients and their association with clinicopathological parameters and disease prognosis. DESIGN AND METHODS: Methylation specific PCR were carried out to investigate the promoter methylation status of stratifin, ERalpha and PR in tumor and circulating DNA in 100 breast cancer patients in a prospective study. The effect of promoter methylation on protein expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Significant association was observed between promoter methylation of stratifin in tumors (61%) and paired sera (56%) (r=0.78; p < or = 0.001). Loss of stratifin expression was observed in 47% tumors and was associated with poor overall survival (p=0.05). Significant correlation was observed between methylation status of ERalpha with PRB (p<0.0001, OR=20.8, 95% CI=7.4-58.0) and stratifin (p=0.003, OR=2.0, 95% CI=0.8-4.4). CONCLUSION: This study underscores the potential utility of serum DNA methylation of these genes as surrogate for tumor DNA methylation as a promising tool for cancer diagnosis.. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to determine the concordance of promoter methylation of stratifin, ERalpha and PR in tumor and circulating DNA in breast cancer patients and their association with clinicopathological parameters and disease prognosis. DESIGN AND METHODS: Methylation specific PCR were carried out to investigate the promoter methylation status of stratifin, ERalpha and PR in tumor and circulating DNA in 100 breast cancer patients in a prospective study. The effect of promoter methylation on protein expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Significant association was observed between promoter methylation of stratifin in tumors (61%) and paired sera (56%) (r=0.78; p < or = 0.001). Loss of stratifin expression was observed in 47% tumors and was associated with poor overall survival (p=0.05). Significant correlation was observed between methylation status of ERalpha with PRB (p<0.0001, OR=20.8, 95% CI=7.4-58.0) and stratifin (p=0.003, OR=2.0, 95% CI=0.8-4.4). CONCLUSION: This study underscores the potential utility of serum DNA methylation of these genes as surrogate for tumor DNA methylation as a promising tool for cancer diagnosis.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the promoter methylation status of TRIM9 in breast cancer and to determine the presence of TRIM9-methylated circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in plasma. Bisulfite sequencing with a next generation sequencer showed TRIM9 promoter methylation in 92 % (11/12) of breast cancer cell lines (BCCs) and 68 % (13/19) of breast tumor tissues but not in any normal breast tissues (0/19). Methylation ratio of TRIM9 was significantly lower in basal type (9 %, n = 23) than luminal A (69 %, n = 29, P = 0.0003). Quantitative RT-PCR of BCCs disclosed an inverse correlation between TRIM9 mRNA expression and methylation ratio. TRIM9 methylated ctDNA in plasma was detected in 18 % (10/56) of metastatic breast cancer patients but not in any of 60 healthy controls. These results indicate that TRIM9 promoter hypermethylation, which suppresses TRIM9 mRNA expression, occurs in a significant proportion of breast tumors, and that TRIM9-methylated ctDNA thus may serve as a tumor marker for breast cancer.. The aim of the present study was to investigate the promoter methylation status of TRIM9 in breast cancer and to determine the presence of TRIM9-methylated circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in plasma. Bisulfite sequencing with a next generation sequencer showed TRIM9 promoter methylation in 92 % (11/12) of breast cancer cell lines (BCCs) and 68 % (13/19) of breast tumor tissues but not in any normal breast tissues (0/19). Methylation ratio of TRIM9 was significantly lower in basal type (9 %, n = 23) than luminal A (69 %, n = 29, P = 0.0003). Quantitative RT-PCR of BCCs disclosed an inverse correlation between TRIM9 mRNA expression and methylation ratio. TRIM9 methylated ctDNA in plasma was detected in 18 % (10/56) of metastatic breast cancer patients but not in any of 60 healthy controls. These results indicate that TRIM9 promoter hypermethylation, which suppresses TRIM9 mRNA expression, occurs in a significant proportion of breast tumors, and that TRIM9-methylated ctDNA thus may serve as a tumor marker for breast cancer.

AIM: We investigated the association of glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) expression and methylation status with clinicopathological characteristics of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Primary ER-positive breast cancer patients (n=177, stage I-III) were retrospectively analyzed. A quantitative GSTP1 methylation assay was performed using DNA micro-dissected from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast surgical specimens and GSTP1 expression was examined immunohistochemically. RESULTS: GSTP1 methylation index (MI) was higher for the following patient subsets: Large-size (p=0.029), high-grade (p=0.010), human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)-positive (p=0.024) and Ki67-positive (p=0.001) patients. In addition, GSTP1 hyper-methylation was more frequently observed in the luminal-B than the luminal-A subtype (p<0.001) and there was no significant difference in GSTP1 positivity between the two subtypes (p=0.150). CONCLUSION: GSTP1 methylation may well be associated with the pathogenesis of the biologically-aggressive phenotype in ER-positive breast cancer.. AIM: We investigated the association of glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) expression and methylation status with clinicopathological characteristics of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Primary ER-positive breast cancer patients (n=177, stage I-III) were retrospectively analyzed. A quantitative GSTP1 methylation assay was performed using DNA micro-dissected from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast surgical specimens and GSTP1 expression was examined immunohistochemically. RESULTS: GSTP1 methylation index (MI) was higher for the following patient subsets: Large-size (p=0.029), high-grade (p=0.010), human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)-positive (p=0.024) and Ki67-positive (p=0.001) patients. In addition, GSTP1 hyper-methylation was more frequently observed in the luminal-B than the luminal-A subtype (p<0.001) and there was no significant difference in GSTP1 positivity between the two subtypes (p=0.150). CONCLUSION: GSTP1 methylation may well be associated with the pathogenesis of the biologically-aggressive phenotype in ER-positive breast cancer.

Aberrant CpG methylations play important roles in cancer development and progression. In this study, aberrant methylations in human breast cancer were searched for using methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis (MS-RDA). A CpG island (CGI) in the 5' region of the heparan sulfate D-glucosaminyl 3-O-sulfotransferase-2 (3-OST-2) gene was found to be hypermethylated, while its exon 2 was hypomethylated. In seven breast cancer cell lines, hypermethylation of the 5' region and loss of 3-OST-2 expression were observed. Treatment with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, removed the methylation of the CGI in the 5' region and restored its expression, demonstrating silencing of the 3-OST-2 gene. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis in 85 primary breast cancers showed that the hypermethylation of the CGI in the 5' region was present in 75 (88%) of them. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis in 37 primary breast cancers showed that the average expression level was decreased in them. Further, MSP analysis in primary colon, lung and pancreatic cancers showed that hypermethylation of the CGI in the 5' region was present in the colon (8/10, 80%), lung (7/10, 70%) and pancreatic (10/10, 100%) cancers. These results showed that silencing of 3-OST-2 was present in a wide range of human cancers. The 3-OST-2 gene encodes an enzyme involved in the final modification step of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), and its silencing is expected to result in abnormal modification of HSPGs and abnormal signal transduction. From the high incidence, silencing of the 3-OST-2 gene is expected to have high diagnostic, and potentially therapeutic, values.. Aberrant CpG methylations play important roles in cancer development and progression. In this study, aberrant methylations in human breast cancer were searched for using methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis (MS-RDA). A CpG island (CGI) in the 5' region of the heparan sulfate D-glucosaminyl 3-O-sulfotransferase-2 (3-OST-2) gene was found to be hypermethylated, while its exon 2 was hypomethylated. In seven breast cancer cell lines, hypermethylation of the 5' region and loss of 3-OST-2 expression were observed. Treatment with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, removed the methylation of the CGI in the 5' region and restored its expression, demonstrating silencing of the 3-OST-2 gene. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) analysis in 85 primary breast cancers showed that the hypermethylation of the CGI in the 5' region was present in 75 (88%) of them. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis in 37 primary breast cancers showed that the average expression level was decreased in them. Further, MSP analysis in primary colon, lung and pancreatic cancers showed that hypermethylation of the CGI in the 5' region was present in the colon (8/10, 80%), lung (7/10, 70%) and pancreatic (10/10, 100%) cancers. These results showed that silencing of 3-OST-2 was present in a wide range of human cancers. The 3-OST-2 gene encodes an enzyme involved in the final modification step of heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), and its silencing is expected to result in abnormal modification of HSPGs and abnormal signal transduction. From the high incidence, silencing of the 3-OST-2 gene is expected to have high diagnostic, and potentially therapeutic, values.

BACKGROUND: Pleomorphic invasive lobular cancer (pleomorphic ILC) is a rare variant of ILC that is characterized by a classic ILC-like growth pattern combined with an infiltrative ductal cancer (IDC)-like high nuclear atypicality. There is an ongoing discussion whether pleomorphic ILC is a dedifferentiated form of ILC or in origin an IDC with a secondary loss of cohesion. Since gene promoter hypermethylation is an early event in breast carcinogenesis and thus may provide information on tumor progression, we set out to compare the methylation patterns of pleomorphic ILC, classic ILC and IDC. In addition, we aimed at analyzing the methylation status of pleomorphic ILC. METHODS: We performed promoter methylation profiling of 24 established and putative tumor suppressor genes by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) analysis in 20 classical ILC, 16 pleomorphic ILC and 20 IDC cases. RESULTS: We found that pleomorphic ILC showed relatively low TP73 and MLH1 methylation levels and relatively high RASSF1A methylation levels compared to classic ILC. Compared to IDC, pleomorphic ILC showed relatively low MLH1 and BRCA1 methylation levels. Hierarchical cluster analysis revealed a similar methylation pattern for pleomorphic ILC and IDC, while the methylation pattern of classic ILC was different. CONCLUSION: This is the first report to identify TP73, RASSF1A, MLH1 and BRCA1 as possible biomarkers to distinguish pleomorphic ILC from classic ILC and IDC.. BACKGROUND: Pleomorphic invasive lobular cancer (pleomorphic ILC) is a rare variant of ILC that is characterized by a classic ILC-like growth pattern combined with an infiltrative ductal cancer (IDC)-like high nuclear atypicality. There is an ongoing discussion whether pleomorphic ILC is a dedifferentiated form of ILC or in origin an IDC with a secondary loss of cohesion. Since gene promoter hypermethylation is an early event in breast carcinogenesis and thus may provide information on tumor progression, we set out to compare the methylation patterns of pleomorphic ILC, classic ILC and IDC. In addition, we aimed at analyzing the methylation status of pleomorphic ILC. METHODS: We performed promoter methylation profiling of 24 established and putative tumor suppressor genes by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) analysis in 20 classical ILC, 16 pleomorphic ILC and 20 IDC cases. RESULTS: We found that pleomorphic ILC showed relatively low TP73 and MLH1 methylation levels and relatively high RASSF1A methylation levels compared to classic ILC. Compared to IDC, pleomorphic ILC showed relatively low MLH1 and BRCA1 methylation levels. Hierarchical cluster analysis revealed a similar methylation pattern for pleomorphic ILC and IDC, while the methylation pattern of classic ILC was different. CONCLUSION: This is the first report to identify TP73, RASSF1A, MLH1 and BRCA1 as possible biomarkers to distinguish pleomorphic ILC from classic ILC and IDC.

BACKGROUND: Tumour suppressor genes are often transcriptionally silenced by promoter hypermethylation, and recent research has implicated alterations in chromatin structure as the mechanistic basis for this repression. In addition to DNA methylation, other epigenetic post-translational modifications that modulate the stability and binding of specific transcription factors to gene promoters have emerged as important mechanisms for controlling gene expression. The aim of this study was to analyse the implications of these mechanisms and their molecular connections in the reactivation of RASSF1A in breast cancer. METHODS: Compounds that modulate the intracellular concentration of adenosine, such as dipyridamole (DIPY), greatly increase the antiproliferative effects of 3-O-(3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoyl)-(-)-catechin (TMCG), a synthetic antifolate derived from the structure of tea catechins. Quantitative real-time PCR arrays and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry indicated that this combination (TMCG/DIPY) induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells by modulating the methylation levels of DNA and proteins (such as E2F1), respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were employed to confirm that this combination induced chromatin remodelling of the RASSF1A promoter and increased the occupancy of E2F1 at the promoter of this tumour suppressor gene. RESULTS: The TMCG/DIPY combination acted as an epigenetic treatment that reactivated RASSF1A expression and induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells. In addition to modulating DNA methylation and chromatin remodelling, this combination also induced demethylation of the E2F1 transcription factor. The ChIP assay showed enhancement of E2F1 occupancy at the unmethylated RASSF1A promoter after TMCG/DIPY treatment. Interestingly, inhibition of E2F1 demethylation using an irreversible inhibitor of lysine-specific demethylase 1 reduced both TMCG/DIPY-mediated RASSF1A expression and apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells, suggesting that DNA and protein demethylation may act together to control these molecular and cellular processes. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates that simultaneous targeting of DNA and E2F1 methylation is an effective epigenetic treatment that reactivates RASSF1A expression and induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells.. BACKGROUND: Tumour suppressor genes are often transcriptionally silenced by promoter hypermethylation, and recent research has implicated alterations in chromatin structure as the mechanistic basis for this repression. In addition to DNA methylation, other epigenetic post-translational modifications that modulate the stability and binding of specific transcription factors to gene promoters have emerged as important mechanisms for controlling gene expression. The aim of this study was to analyse the implications of these mechanisms and their molecular connections in the reactivation of RASSF1A in breast cancer. METHODS: Compounds that modulate the intracellular concentration of adenosine, such as dipyridamole (DIPY), greatly increase the antiproliferative effects of 3-O-(3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoyl)-(-)-catechin (TMCG), a synthetic antifolate derived from the structure of tea catechins. Quantitative real-time PCR arrays and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry indicated that this combination (TMCG/DIPY) induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells by modulating the methylation levels of DNA and proteins (such as E2F1), respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were employed to confirm that this combination induced chromatin remodelling of the RASSF1A promoter and increased the occupancy of E2F1 at the promoter of this tumour suppressor gene. RESULTS: The TMCG/DIPY combination acted as an epigenetic treatment that reactivated RASSF1A expression and induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells. In addition to modulating DNA methylation and chromatin remodelling, this combination also induced demethylation of the E2F1 transcription factor. The ChIP assay showed enhancement of E2F1 occupancy at the unmethylated RASSF1A promoter after TMCG/DIPY treatment. Interestingly, inhibition of E2F1 demethylation using an irreversible inhibitor of lysine-specific demethylase 1 reduced both TMCG/DIPY-mediated RASSF1A expression and apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 cells, suggesting that DNA and protein demethylation may act together to control these molecular and cellular processes. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study demonstrates that simultaneous targeting of DNA and E2F1 methylation is an effective epigenetic treatment that reactivates RASSF1A expression and induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells.

DNA methylation of promoters is linked to transcriptional silencing of protein-coding genes, and its alteration plays important roles in cancer formation. For example, hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes has been seen in some cancers. Alteration of methylation in the promoters of microRNAs (miRNAs) has also been linked to transcriptional changes in cancers; however, no systematic studies of methylation and transcription of miRNAs have been reported. In the present study, to clarify the relation between DNA methylation and transcription of miRNAs, next-generation sequencing and microarrays were used to analyze the methylation and expression of miRNAs, protein-coding genes, other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and pseudogenes in the human breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and the adriamycin (ADR) resistant cell line MCF7/ADR. DNA methylation in the proximal promoter of miRNAs is tightly linked to transcriptional silencing, as it is with protein-coding genes. In protein-coding genes, highly expressed genes have CpG-rich proximal promoters whereas weakly expressed genes do not. This is only rarely observed in other gene categories, including miRNAs. The present study highlights the epigenetic similarities and differences between miRNA and protein-coding genes.. DNA methylation of promoters is linked to transcriptional silencing of protein-coding genes, and its alteration plays important roles in cancer formation. For example, hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes has been seen in some cancers. Alteration of methylation in the promoters of microRNAs (miRNAs) has also been linked to transcriptional changes in cancers; however, no systematic studies of methylation and transcription of miRNAs have been reported. In the present study, to clarify the relation between DNA methylation and transcription of miRNAs, next-generation sequencing and microarrays were used to analyze the methylation and expression of miRNAs, protein-coding genes, other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), and pseudogenes in the human breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and the adriamycin (ADR) resistant cell line MCF7/ADR. DNA methylation in the proximal promoter of miRNAs is tightly linked to transcriptional silencing, as it is with protein-coding genes. In protein-coding genes, highly expressed genes have CpG-rich proximal promoters whereas weakly expressed genes do not. This is only rarely observed in other gene categories, including miRNAs. The present study highlights the epigenetic similarities and differences between miRNA and protein-coding genes.

Our previous study showed that PLCD1 significantly decreases cell proliferation and affects cell cycle progression in breast cancer cells. In the present study, we aimed to investigate its functional and molecular mechanisms, and whether or not can become a new target for gene therapies. We found reduced PLCD1 protein expression in breast tumor tissues compared with paired surgical margin tissues. PLCD1 promoter CpG methylation was detected in 55 of 96 (57%) primary breast tumors, but not in surgical-margin tissues and normal breast tissues. Ectopic expression of PLCD1 inhibited breast tumor cell proliferation in vivo by inducing apoptosis and suppressed tumor cell migration by regulating cytoskeletal reorganization proteins including RhoA and phospho-cofilin. Furthermore, we found that PLCD1 induced p53 accumulation, increased p27 and p21 protein levels, and cleaved PARP. Finally, we constructed an adenoviral vector expressing PLCD1 (AdH5-PLCD1), which exhibited strong cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. Our findings provide insights into the development of PLCD1 gene therapies for breast cancer and perhaps, other human cancers.. Our previous study showed that PLCD1 significantly decreases cell proliferation and affects cell cycle progression in breast cancer cells. In the present study, we aimed to investigate its functional and molecular mechanisms, and whether or not can become a new target for gene therapies. We found reduced PLCD1 protein expression in breast tumor tissues compared with paired surgical margin tissues. PLCD1 promoter CpG methylation was detected in 55 of 96 (57%) primary breast tumors, but not in surgical-margin tissues and normal breast tissues. Ectopic expression of PLCD1 inhibited breast tumor cell proliferation in vivo by inducing apoptosis and suppressed tumor cell migration by regulating cytoskeletal reorganization proteins including RhoA and phospho-cofilin. Furthermore, we found that PLCD1 induced p53 accumulation, increased p27 and p21 protein levels, and cleaved PARP. Finally, we constructed an adenoviral vector expressing PLCD1 (AdH5-PLCD1), which exhibited strong cytotoxicity in breast cancer cells. Our findings provide insights into the development of PLCD1 gene therapies for breast cancer and perhaps, other human cancers.

INTRODUCTION: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-invasive lesion of the breast that is frequently detected by mammography and subsequently removed by surgery. However, it is estimated that about half of the detected lesions would never have progressed into invasive cancer. Identifying DCIS and invasive cancer specific epigenetic lesions and understanding how these epigenetic changes are involved in triggering tumour progression is important for a better understanding of which lesions are at risk of becoming invasive. METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of ABCB1, CDKN2A/p16INK4a, ESR1, FOXC1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A was performed by pyrosequencing in a series of 27 pure DCIS, 28 small invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs), 34 IDCs with a DCIS component and 5 normal breast tissue samples. FOXC1, ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were analyzed in 23 additional normal breast tissue samples. Real-Time PCR expression analysis was performed for FOXC1. RESULTS: Aberrant DNA methylation was observed in all three diagnosis groups for the following genes: ABCB1, FOXC1, GSTP1, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A. For most of these genes, methylation was already present at the DCIS level with the same frequency as within IDCs. For FOXC1 significant differences in methylation levels were observed between normal breast tissue and invasive tumours (P < 0.001). The average DNA methylation levels were significantly higher in the pure IDCs and IDCs with DCIS compared to pure DCIS (P = 0.007 and P = 0.001, respectively). Real-time PCR analysis of FOXC1 expression from 25 DCIS, 23 IDCs and 28 normal tissue samples showed lower gene expression levels of FOXC1 in both methylated and unmethylated tumours compared to normal tissue (P < 0.001). DNA methylation levels of FOXC1, GSTP1, ABCB1 and RASSF1A were higher in oestrogen receptor (ER) positive vs. ER negative tumours; whereas methylation levels of FOXC1, ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were lower in tumours with a TP53 mutation. CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative methylation analysis identified ABCB1, FOXC1, PPP2R2B and PTEN as novel genes to be methylated in DCIS. In particular, FOXC1 showed a significant increase in the methylation frequency in invasive tumours. Low FOXC1 gene expression in both methylated and unmethylated DCIS and IDCs indicates that the loss of its expression is an early event during breast cancer progression.. INTRODUCTION: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-invasive lesion of the breast that is frequently detected by mammography and subsequently removed by surgery. However, it is estimated that about half of the detected lesions would never have progressed into invasive cancer. Identifying DCIS and invasive cancer specific epigenetic lesions and understanding how these epigenetic changes are involved in triggering tumour progression is important for a better understanding of which lesions are at risk of becoming invasive. METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of ABCB1, CDKN2A/p16INK4a, ESR1, FOXC1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A was performed by pyrosequencing in a series of 27 pure DCIS, 28 small invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs), 34 IDCs with a DCIS component and 5 normal breast tissue samples. FOXC1, ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were analyzed in 23 additional normal breast tissue samples. Real-Time PCR expression analysis was performed for FOXC1. RESULTS: Aberrant DNA methylation was observed in all three diagnosis groups for the following genes: ABCB1, FOXC1, GSTP1, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A. For most of these genes, methylation was already present at the DCIS level with the same frequency as within IDCs. For FOXC1 significant differences in methylation levels were observed between normal breast tissue and invasive tumours (P < 0.001). The average DNA methylation levels were significantly higher in the pure IDCs and IDCs with DCIS compared to pure DCIS (P = 0.007 and P = 0.001, respectively). Real-time PCR analysis of FOXC1 expression from 25 DCIS, 23 IDCs and 28 normal tissue samples showed lower gene expression levels of FOXC1 in both methylated and unmethylated tumours compared to normal tissue (P < 0.001). DNA methylation levels of FOXC1, GSTP1, ABCB1 and RASSF1A were higher in oestrogen receptor (ER) positive vs. ER negative tumours; whereas methylation levels of FOXC1, ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were lower in tumours with a TP53 mutation. CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative methylation analysis identified ABCB1, FOXC1, PPP2R2B and PTEN as novel genes to be methylated in DCIS. In particular, FOXC1 showed a significant increase in the methylation frequency in invasive tumours. Low FOXC1 gene expression in both methylated and unmethylated DCIS and IDCs indicates that the loss of its expression is an early event during breast cancer progression.

. 
Changes in the status of DNA methylation are one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia. Because it is possible to detect these epigenetic alterations in the bloodstream of patients, we investigated whether aberrant DNA methylation in patient pretherapeutic sera is of prognostic significance in breast cancer. Using MethyLight, a high-throughput DNA methylation assay, we analyzed 39 genes in a gene evaluation set, consisting of 10 sera from metastasized patients, 26 patients with primary breast cancer, and 10 control patients. To determine the prognostic value of genes identified within the gene evaluation set, we finally analyzed pretreatment sera of 24 patients having had no adjuvant treatment (training set) to determine their prognostic value. An independent test set consisting of 62 patients was then used to test the validity of genes and combinations of genes, which in the training set were found to be good prognostic markers. In the gene evaluation set we identified five genes (ESR1, APC, HSD17B4, HIC1, and RASSF1A). In the training set, patients with methylated serum DNA for RASSF1A and/or APC had the worst prognosis (P < 0.001). This finding was confirmed by analyzing serum samples from the independent test set (P = 0.007). When analyzing all 86 of the investigated patients, multivariate analysis showed methylated RASSF1A and/or APC serum DNA to be independently associated with poor outcome, with a relative risk for death of 5.7. DNA methylation of particular genes in pretherapeutic sera of breast cancer patients, especially of RASSF1A/APC, is more powerful than standard prognostic parameters.. Changes in the status of DNA methylation are one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia. Because it is possible to detect these epigenetic alterations in the bloodstream of patients, we investigated whether aberrant DNA methylation in patient pretherapeutic sera is of prognostic significance in breast cancer. Using MethyLight, a high-throughput DNA methylation assay, we analyzed 39 genes in a gene evaluation set, consisting of 10 sera from metastasized patients, 26 patients with primary breast cancer, and 10 control patients. To determine the prognostic value of genes identified within the gene evaluation set, we finally analyzed pretreatment sera of 24 patients having had no adjuvant treatment (training set) to determine their prognostic value. An independent test set consisting of 62 patients was then used to test the validity of genes and combinations of genes, which in the training set were found to be good prognostic markers. In the gene evaluation set we identified five genes (ESR1, APC, HSD17B4, HIC1, and RASSF1A). In the training set, patients with methylated serum DNA for RASSF1A and/or APC had the worst prognosis (P < 0.001). This finding was confirmed by analyzing serum samples from the independent test set (P = 0.007). When analyzing all 86 of the investigated patients, multivariate analysis showed methylated RASSF1A and/or APC serum DNA to be independently associated with poor outcome, with a relative risk for death of 5.7. DNA methylation of particular genes in pretherapeutic sera of breast cancer patients, especially of RASSF1A/APC, is more powerful than standard prognostic parameters.

This study investigates the relationship of promoter methylation in tumor suppressor genes with copy-number aberrations (CNA) and with tumor markers in breast cancer (BCs). The study includes 98 formalin fixed paraffin-embedded BCs in which promoter methylation of 24 tumour suppressor genes were assessed by Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA), CNA of 20 BC related genes by MLPA and ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6, CK18, EGFR, Cadherin-E, P53, Ki-67 and PARP expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Cluster analysis classed BCs in two groups according to promoter methylation percentage: the highly-methylated group (16 BCs), containing mostly hyper-methylated genes, and the sparsely-methylated group (82 BCs) with hypo-methylated genes. ATM, CDKN2A, VHL, CHFR and CDKN2B showed the greatest differences in the mean methylation percentage between these groups. We found no relationship of the IHC parameters or pathological features with methylation status, except for Catherin-E (p = 0.008). However the highly methylated BCs showed higher CNA proportion than the sparsely methylated BCs (p < 0.001, OR = 1.62; IC 95% [1.26, 2.07]). CDC6, MAPT, MED1, PRMD14 and AURKA showed the major differences in the CNA percentage between the two groups, exceeding the 22%. Methylation in RASSF1, CASP8, DAPK1 and GSTP1 conferred the highest probability of harboring CNA. Our results show a new link between promoter methylation and CNA giving support to the importance of methylation events to establish new BCs subtypes. Our findings may be also of relevance in personalized therapy assessment, which could benefit the hyper methylated BC patients group.. This study investigates the relationship of promoter methylation in tumor suppressor genes with copy-number aberrations (CNA) and with tumor markers in breast cancer (BCs). The study includes 98 formalin fixed paraffin-embedded BCs in which promoter methylation of 24 tumour suppressor genes were assessed by Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA), CNA of 20 BC related genes by MLPA and ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6, CK18, EGFR, Cadherin-E, P53, Ki-67 and PARP expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Cluster analysis classed BCs in two groups according to promoter methylation percentage: the highly-methylated group (16 BCs), containing mostly hyper-methylated genes, and the sparsely-methylated group (82 BCs) with hypo-methylated genes. ATM, CDKN2A, VHL, CHFR and CDKN2B showed the greatest differences in the mean methylation percentage between these groups. We found no relationship of the IHC parameters or pathological features with methylation status, except for Catherin-E (p = 0.008). However the highly methylated BCs showed higher CNA proportion than the sparsely methylated BCs (p < 0.001, OR = 1.62; IC 95% [1.26, 2.07]). CDC6, MAPT, MED1, PRMD14 and AURKA showed the major differences in the CNA percentage between the two groups, exceeding the 22%. Methylation in RASSF1, CASP8, DAPK1 and GSTP1 conferred the highest probability of harboring CNA. Our results show a new link between promoter methylation and CNA giving support to the importance of methylation events to establish new BCs subtypes. Our findings may be also of relevance in personalized therapy assessment, which could benefit the hyper methylated BC patients group.

DNA methylation plays an important role in carcinogenesis through epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Aberrant methylation usually results from changes in the activity of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). Some studies show that the overexpression of the DNMTs may lead to aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes. Also the overexpression of DNMTs may be related to methylation status of their genes. Due to limited number of studies on DNMT3B promoter methylation, this study was performed to quantitatively measure the methylation level of DNMT3B gene in archival formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues from breast cancer patients. Using differential high resolution melting analysis (D-HRMA) technology, the methylation level of DNMT3B gene promoter was quantified in 98 breast cancer FFPE tissues and also 10 fresh frozen normal tissue samples. Statistical analyses used for analyzing the correlation between the methylation and clinical variables. All the normal samples were found to be methylated at the DNMT3B promoter (the average methylation level 3.34%). Patients were identified as hypo-methylated (mean methylation level 0.8%), methylated (mean methylation level 2.48%) and hyper-methylated (mean methylation level 10.5%). Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between the methylation status and the sample type, cancer type and tumor size. Also the methylation level was significantly associated with histologic grade. It is concluded that quantification of DNMT3B promoter methylation might be used as a reliable and sensitive diagnostic and prognostic tool in breast cancer. Also D-HRMA is demonstrated as a rapid and cost effective method for quantitative evaluation of promoter methylation.. DNA methylation plays an important role in carcinogenesis through epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes. Aberrant methylation usually results from changes in the activity of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). Some studies show that the overexpression of the DNMTs may lead to aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes. Also the overexpression of DNMTs may be related to methylation status of their genes. Due to limited number of studies on DNMT3B promoter methylation, this study was performed to quantitatively measure the methylation level of DNMT3B gene in archival formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues from breast cancer patients. Using differential high resolution melting analysis (D-HRMA) technology, the methylation level of DNMT3B gene promoter was quantified in 98 breast cancer FFPE tissues and also 10 fresh frozen normal tissue samples. Statistical analyses used for analyzing the correlation between the methylation and clinical variables. All the normal samples were found to be methylated at the DNMT3B promoter (the average methylation level 3.34%). Patients were identified as hypo-methylated (mean methylation level 0.8%), methylated (mean methylation level 2.48%) and hyper-methylated (mean methylation level 10.5%). Statistical analysis showed a significant correlation between the methylation status and the sample type, cancer type and tumor size. Also the methylation level was significantly associated with histologic grade. It is concluded that quantification of DNMT3B promoter methylation might be used as a reliable and sensitive diagnostic and prognostic tool in breast cancer. Also D-HRMA is demonstrated as a rapid and cost effective method for quantitative evaluation of promoter methylation.

BACKGROUND: E-cadherin (CDH1) plays an important role in cell-cell adhesion of epithelial tissues. Loss of E-cadherin expression can lead to loss of tissue integrity, metastasis, and cancer progression. Also loss of E-cadherin expression might be related to aberrant promoter methylation of the CDH1 gene. Many studies have been performed on CDH1 promoter methylation, especially in breast cancer. Although most of the studies have used qualitative methods for methylation analysis, this study is designed to quantitatively investigate CDH1 promoter methylation in breast cancer and its correlation with patients' clinicopathological features. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using differential high resolution melting analysis (D-HRMA), the methylation level of the CDH1 gene promoter was quantified in 98 breast cancer formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues and also 10 fresh frozen normal breast tissues. RESULTS: All samples were detected to be methylated at the CDH1 promoter region. About 74.5% of the breast cancer samples were hypermethylated with an average methylation level of around 60%, while 25.5% of the patients were methylated with the mean methylation level of about 33%, and 90% of the normal samples had a mean methylation level of about 18%. Statistical analyses represented a significant correlation between CDH1 promoter methylation and cancer progression hallmarks, such as, clinical stage, nodal involvement, tumor size, and histological grade. CONCLUSION: In summary, quantitation of CDH1 promoter methylation can serve as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in breast cancer. Also D-HRMA can be used as a fast and reliable method for quantitation of promoter methylation.. BACKGROUND: E-cadherin (CDH1) plays an important role in cell-cell adhesion of epithelial tissues. Loss of E-cadherin expression can lead to loss of tissue integrity, metastasis, and cancer progression. Also loss of E-cadherin expression might be related to aberrant promoter methylation of the CDH1 gene. Many studies have been performed on CDH1 promoter methylation, especially in breast cancer. Although most of the studies have used qualitative methods for methylation analysis, this study is designed to quantitatively investigate CDH1 promoter methylation in breast cancer and its correlation with patients' clinicopathological features. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using differential high resolution melting analysis (D-HRMA), the methylation level of the CDH1 gene promoter was quantified in 98 breast cancer formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues and also 10 fresh frozen normal breast tissues. RESULTS: All samples were detected to be methylated at the CDH1 promoter region. About 74.5% of the breast cancer samples were hypermethylated with an average methylation level of around 60%, while 25.5% of the patients were methylated with the mean methylation level of about 33%, and 90% of the normal samples had a mean methylation level of about 18%. Statistical analyses represented a significant correlation between CDH1 promoter methylation and cancer progression hallmarks, such as, clinical stage, nodal involvement, tumor size, and histological grade. CONCLUSION: In summary, quantitation of CDH1 promoter methylation can serve as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in breast cancer. Also D-HRMA can be used as a fast and reliable method for quantitation of promoter methylation.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is often overexpressed in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). However, clinical studies have shown that therapies against EGFR are not effective in patients with TNBC. Recently, it has been reported that arginine 198/200 in EGFR extracellular domain is methylated by PRMT1 and that the methylation confers resistance to EGFR monoclonal antibody cetuximab in colorectal cancer cells. To explore a potential mechanism underlying intrinsic resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in TNBC, we investigated the role of PRMT1 in EGFR methylation and signaling in MDA-MB-468 (468) TNBC cells. METHODS: We knocked down PRMT1 in 468 cells by shRNA, and subjected the cell lysates to Western blot analysis to examine EGFR activation and its downstream molecules. We also evaluated cell proliferation and sphere formation of PRMT1-knockdown cells. Finally, we examined the effects of pan-PRMT inhibitor, AMI-1, on cetuximab by colony formation and soft agar assays. RESULTS: EGFR methylation and activity was significantly reduced in PRMT1-knockdown cells compared to the parental cells. Knockdown of PRMT1 also reduced cell proliferation and sphere formation. Moreover, AMI-1 sensitized 468 cells to cetuximab. CONCLUSION: The results indicate that PRMT1 is critical for EGFR activity in 468 cells. Our data also suggest that inhibition of PRMT1 sensitizes TNBC cells to cetuximab. Thus, inhibition of PRMT1 may be an effective therapeutic strategy to overcome intrinsic resistance to cetuximab in TNBC.. BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is often overexpressed in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). However, clinical studies have shown that therapies against EGFR are not effective in patients with TNBC. Recently, it has been reported that arginine 198/200 in EGFR extracellular domain is methylated by PRMT1 and that the methylation confers resistance to EGFR monoclonal antibody cetuximab in colorectal cancer cells. To explore a potential mechanism underlying intrinsic resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in TNBC, we investigated the role of PRMT1 in EGFR methylation and signaling in MDA-MB-468 (468) TNBC cells. METHODS: We knocked down PRMT1 in 468 cells by shRNA, and subjected the cell lysates to Western blot analysis to examine EGFR activation and its downstream molecules. We also evaluated cell proliferation and sphere formation of PRMT1-knockdown cells. Finally, we examined the effects of pan-PRMT inhibitor, AMI-1, on cetuximab by colony formation and soft agar assays. RESULTS: EGFR methylation and activity was significantly reduced in PRMT1-knockdown cells compared to the parental cells. Knockdown of PRMT1 also reduced cell proliferation and sphere formation. Moreover, AMI-1 sensitized 468 cells to cetuximab. CONCLUSION: The results indicate that PRMT1 is critical for EGFR activity in 468 cells. Our data also suggest that inhibition of PRMT1 sensitizes TNBC cells to cetuximab. Thus, inhibition of PRMT1 may be an effective therapeutic strategy to overcome intrinsic resistance to cetuximab in TNBC.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) functions as a drug efflux transporter that mediates drug resistance. Topoisomerase I inhibitors, including 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38), are substrates effluxed by BCRP. However, it remains unclear whether the overexpression of BCRP induces drug resistance during chemotherapy. The objectives of the current study were to examine a correlation of altered promoter methylation of BCRP with BCRP expression and to investigate the correlation between methylation status according to methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) analysis and BCRP expression levels in several small cell and nonsmall cell lung cancer cells. METHODS: Non-BCRP-expressing PC-6 cells, which were sensitive to SN-38, were treated with DNA methyltransferase inhibitor to induce BCRP re-expression by means of reverse transcriptase-polymersae chain reaction, Western blot, and flow cytometric analyses. Subsequently, bisulfite sequencing analysis in both PC-6 cells and SN-38-resistant PC-6/SN2-5H, highly expressing BCRP cells was performed to identify the methylated region in the BCRP promoter. Finally, the authors established an MSP method on the basis of methylated and unmethylated DNA sequences. RESULTS: DNA methyltransferase inhibitor treatment of PC-6 cells induced BCRP re-expression at the messenger RNA and protein levels. Bisulfite sequencing analysis revealed that both alleles at all CpG sites were methylated completely in PC-6 cells, whereas alleles at portions of CpG sites in PC-6/SN2-5H cells were unmethylated. There was an inverse correlation between promoter methylation of BCRP determined by MSP and BCRP expression in both small cell and nonsmall cell lung cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that demethylation of at least 1 allele is necessary for BCRP re-expression and that promoter demethylation of BCRP may be a mechanism of BCRP expression in lung cancer cells.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) functions as a drug efflux transporter that mediates drug resistance. Topoisomerase I inhibitors, including 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38), are substrates effluxed by BCRP. However, it remains unclear whether the overexpression of BCRP induces drug resistance during chemotherapy. The objectives of the current study were to examine a correlation of altered promoter methylation of BCRP with BCRP expression and to investigate the correlation between methylation status according to methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) analysis and BCRP expression levels in several small cell and nonsmall cell lung cancer cells. METHODS: Non-BCRP-expressing PC-6 cells, which were sensitive to SN-38, were treated with DNA methyltransferase inhibitor to induce BCRP re-expression by means of reverse transcriptase-polymersae chain reaction, Western blot, and flow cytometric analyses. Subsequently, bisulfite sequencing analysis in both PC-6 cells and SN-38-resistant PC-6/SN2-5H, highly expressing BCRP cells was performed to identify the methylated region in the BCRP promoter. Finally, the authors established an MSP method on the basis of methylated and unmethylated DNA sequences. RESULTS: DNA methyltransferase inhibitor treatment of PC-6 cells induced BCRP re-expression at the messenger RNA and protein levels. Bisulfite sequencing analysis revealed that both alleles at all CpG sites were methylated completely in PC-6 cells, whereas alleles at portions of CpG sites in PC-6/SN2-5H cells were unmethylated. There was an inverse correlation between promoter methylation of BCRP determined by MSP and BCRP expression in both small cell and nonsmall cell lung cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that demethylation of at least 1 allele is necessary for BCRP re-expression and that promoter demethylation of BCRP may be a mechanism of BCRP expression in lung cancer cells.

Even after tremendous molecular studies, early detection,more accurate and sensitive diagnosis, and prognosis of breast cancer appear to be a riddle so far. To stab the enigma, this study is designed to envisage DNA methylation signatures as cancer-specific and stage-specific biomarkers in Indian patients. Rigorous review of scattered scientific reports on aberrant DNA methylation helped us to select and analyze a potential tumor suppressor gene pair (FHIT and p16 genes) in breast cancer patients. Methylation signatures from 232 primary sporadic breast cancer patients were pinpointed by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). To increase the sensitivity, we combined both MSP and expression studies (RT-PCR and Northern blotting) in a reproducible manner. Statistical analysis illustrated that hypermethylation of FHIT gene ( p < 0.0001) and p16 gene ( p=0.04) may be used as a potential diagnostic marker to diagnose the early and locally advanced stages of breast cancer. Additionally, the study authenticates the dependency of methylation and expressional loss of p16 gene on FHIT gene silencing. This observation not only describes the severity of disease when both genes are silenced but also drives to speculate the molecular cross talk between two genes or genetic pathways dictated by them separately.. Even after tremendous molecular studies, early detection,more accurate and sensitive diagnosis, and prognosis of breast cancer appear to be a riddle so far. To stab the enigma, this study is designed to envisage DNA methylation signatures as cancer-specific and stage-specific biomarkers in Indian patients. Rigorous review of scattered scientific reports on aberrant DNA methylation helped us to select and analyze a potential tumor suppressor gene pair (FHIT and p16 genes) in breast cancer patients. Methylation signatures from 232 primary sporadic breast cancer patients were pinpointed by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). To increase the sensitivity, we combined both MSP and expression studies (RT-PCR and Northern blotting) in a reproducible manner. Statistical analysis illustrated that hypermethylation of FHIT gene ( p < 0.0001) and p16 gene ( p=0.04) may be used as a potential diagnostic marker to diagnose the early and locally advanced stages of breast cancer. Additionally, the study authenticates the dependency of methylation and expressional loss of p16 gene on FHIT gene silencing. This observation not only describes the severity of disease when both genes are silenced but also drives to speculate the molecular cross talk between two genes or genetic pathways dictated by them separately.

The Tudor domain-containing proteins are characterized by their specific interactions with methylated protein motifs, including methyl-arginines and methyl-lysines. The Tudor domain-containing protein 3 (TDRD3) is one of the major methyl-arginine effector molecules that recognizes methylated arginine residues on histones and the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, and activates transcription. However, majority of the cellular TDRD3 localizes to the cytoplasm and its functions there are still elusive. Here, we have identified ubiquitin-specific protease 9 X-linked (USP9X) as a TDRD3-interacting protein by GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation. Detailed characterization suggests that the interaction between TDRD3 and USP9X is mediated through the Tudor domain of TDRD3 and the arginine methylation of USP9X. This interaction plays a critical role in TDRD3 protein stability, as knockdown of USP9X expression leads to increased TDRD3 ubiquitination. We also found that USP9X co-localizes with TDRD3 in cytoplasmic stress granules and this localization is diminished in Tdrd3-null mouse embryonic fibroblast cells, suggesting that TDRD3 is essential for USP9X stress granule localization. Furthermore, we found that one of the USP9X de-ubiquitination targets, myeloid cell leukemia protein 1, is regulated by TDRD3, indicating that TDRD3 potentially regulates USP9X de-ubiquitinase activity. Finally, we show that knockdown of TDRD3 expression sensitizes breast cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drug-induced apoptosis, likely due to its regulation of USP9X. This study provides a novel candidate strategy for targeting apoptosis pathways in cancer therapy.. The Tudor domain-containing proteins are characterized by their specific interactions with methylated protein motifs, including methyl-arginines and methyl-lysines. The Tudor domain-containing protein 3 (TDRD3) is one of the major methyl-arginine effector molecules that recognizes methylated arginine residues on histones and the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, and activates transcription. However, majority of the cellular TDRD3 localizes to the cytoplasm and its functions there are still elusive. Here, we have identified ubiquitin-specific protease 9 X-linked (USP9X) as a TDRD3-interacting protein by GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down and co-immunoprecipitation. Detailed characterization suggests that the interaction between TDRD3 and USP9X is mediated through the Tudor domain of TDRD3 and the arginine methylation of USP9X. This interaction plays a critical role in TDRD3 protein stability, as knockdown of USP9X expression leads to increased TDRD3 ubiquitination. We also found that USP9X co-localizes with TDRD3 in cytoplasmic stress granules and this localization is diminished in Tdrd3-null mouse embryonic fibroblast cells, suggesting that TDRD3 is essential for USP9X stress granule localization. Furthermore, we found that one of the USP9X de-ubiquitination targets, myeloid cell leukemia protein 1, is regulated by TDRD3, indicating that TDRD3 potentially regulates USP9X de-ubiquitinase activity. Finally, we show that knockdown of TDRD3 expression sensitizes breast cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drug-induced apoptosis, likely due to its regulation of USP9X. This study provides a novel candidate strategy for targeting apoptosis pathways in cancer therapy.

Loss of expression for both the estrogen receptor-alpha and E-cadherin genes has been linked to disease progression in human ductal breast carcinomas and has been associated with aberrant 5' CpG island methylation. To assess when, during malignant progression, such methylation begins and whether such methylation increases with advancing disease, we have surveyed 111 ductal carcinomas of the breast for aberrant methylation of the estrogen receptor-alpha and E-cadherin 5' CpG islands. Hypermethylation of either CpG island was evident prior to invasion in approximately 30% of ductal carcinoma in situ lesions and increased significantly to nearly 60% in metastatic lesions. Coincident methylation of both CpG islands also increased significantly from approximately 20% in ductal carcinoma in situ to nearly 50% in metastatic lesions. Furthermore, in all cases, the pattern of methylation displayed substantial heterogeneity, reflecting the well-established, heterogeneous loss of expression for these genes in ductal carcinomas of the breast.. Loss of expression for both the estrogen receptor-alpha and E-cadherin genes has been linked to disease progression in human ductal breast carcinomas and has been associated with aberrant 5' CpG island methylation. To assess when, during malignant progression, such methylation begins and whether such methylation increases with advancing disease, we have surveyed 111 ductal carcinomas of the breast for aberrant methylation of the estrogen receptor-alpha and E-cadherin 5' CpG islands. Hypermethylation of either CpG island was evident prior to invasion in approximately 30% of ductal carcinoma in situ lesions and increased significantly to nearly 60% in metastatic lesions. Coincident methylation of both CpG islands also increased significantly from approximately 20% in ductal carcinoma in situ to nearly 50% in metastatic lesions. Furthermore, in all cases, the pattern of methylation displayed substantial heterogeneity, reflecting the well-established, heterogeneous loss of expression for these genes in ductal carcinomas of the breast.

Obesity, genetic polymorphisms of xenobiotic metabolic pathway, hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes, and hypomethylation of proapoptotic genes are known to be independent risk factors for breast cancer. The objective of this study is to evaluate the combined effect of these environmental, genetic, and epigenetic risk factors on the susceptibility to breast cancer. PCR-RFLP and multiplex PCR were used for the genetic analysis of six variants of xenobiotic metabolic pathway. Methylation-specific PCR was used for the epigenetic analysis of four genetic loci. Multifactor dimensionality reduction analysis revealed a significant interaction between the body mass index (BMI) and catechol-O-methyl transferase H108L variant alone or in combination with cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1m1 variant. Women with "Luminal A" breast cancer phenotype had higher BMI compared to other phenotypes and healthy controls. There was no association between the BMI and tumor grade. The post-menopausal obese women exhibited lower glutathione levels. BMI showed a positive association with the methylation of extracellular superoxide dismutase (r = 0.21, p < 0.05), Ras-association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 (RASSF1A) (r = 0.31, p < 0.001), and breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (r = 0.19, p < 0.05); and inverse association with methylation of BNIP3 (r = -0.48, p < 0.0001). To conclude based on these results, obesity increases the breast cancer susceptibility by two possible mechanisms: (i) by interacting with xenobiotic genetic polymorphisms in inducing increased oxidative DNA damage and (ii) by altering the methylome of several tumor suppressor genes.. Obesity, genetic polymorphisms of xenobiotic metabolic pathway, hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes, and hypomethylation of proapoptotic genes are known to be independent risk factors for breast cancer. The objective of this study is to evaluate the combined effect of these environmental, genetic, and epigenetic risk factors on the susceptibility to breast cancer. PCR-RFLP and multiplex PCR were used for the genetic analysis of six variants of xenobiotic metabolic pathway. Methylation-specific PCR was used for the epigenetic analysis of four genetic loci. Multifactor dimensionality reduction analysis revealed a significant interaction between the body mass index (BMI) and catechol-O-methyl transferase H108L variant alone or in combination with cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1m1 variant. Women with "Luminal A" breast cancer phenotype had higher BMI compared to other phenotypes and healthy controls. There was no association between the BMI and tumor grade. The post-menopausal obese women exhibited lower glutathione levels. BMI showed a positive association with the methylation of extracellular superoxide dismutase (r = 0.21, p < 0.05), Ras-association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 (RASSF1A) (r = 0.31, p < 0.001), and breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (r = 0.19, p < 0.05); and inverse association with methylation of BNIP3 (r = -0.48, p < 0.0001). To conclude based on these results, obesity increases the breast cancer susceptibility by two possible mechanisms: (i) by interacting with xenobiotic genetic polymorphisms in inducing increased oxidative DNA damage and (ii) by altering the methylome of several tumor suppressor genes.

Few reports are available on mutations in the promoter of tumour suppressor genes like p16, WT1 and Rb in cancers. However, the involvement of p53 promoter in cancers is not clearly known. Further, methylation of CpG sites is a major contributor of mutations in several genes. So an attempt has been made to determine the mutation and methylation status of p53 promoter in breast tumours. Results have demonstrated absence of mutations and deletions in p53 promoter, leading us to conclude that mutation of p53 promoter is probably not a significant factor in breast tumorigenesis. Methylation analysis has shown that the CCGG sites in the p53 promoter are unmethylated unlike that of its exons. Further, it has been shown that there is no change in the methylation profile of the CCGG sites in breast tumours. However, such studies are to be conducted in different types of tumours to define the role of p53 promoter mutation and methylation in the process of tumorigenesis.. Few reports are available on mutations in the promoter of tumour suppressor genes like p16, WT1 and Rb in cancers. However, the involvement of p53 promoter in cancers is not clearly known. Further, methylation of CpG sites is a major contributor of mutations in several genes. So an attempt has been made to determine the mutation and methylation status of p53 promoter in breast tumours. Results have demonstrated absence of mutations and deletions in p53 promoter, leading us to conclude that mutation of p53 promoter is probably not a significant factor in breast tumorigenesis. Methylation analysis has shown that the CCGG sites in the p53 promoter are unmethylated unlike that of its exons. Further, it has been shown that there is no change in the methylation profile of the CCGG sites in breast tumours. However, such studies are to be conducted in different types of tumours to define the role of p53 promoter mutation and methylation in the process of tumorigenesis.

. 
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease comprising several biologically different types, exhibiting diverse responses to treatment. In the past years, gene expression profiling has led to definition of several "intrinsic subtypes" of breast cancer (basal-like, HER2-enriched, luminal-A, luminal-B and normal-like), and microarray based predictors such as PAM50 have been developed. Despite their advantage over traditional histopathological classification, precise identification of breast cancer subtypes, especially within the largest and highly variable luminal-A class, remains a challenge. In this study, we revisited the molecular classification of breast tumors using both expression and methylation data obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). METHODS: Unsupervised clustering was applied on 1148 and 679 breast cancer samples using RNA-Seq and DNA methylation data, respectively. Clusters were evaluated using clinical information and by comparison to PAM50 subtypes. Differentially expressed genes and differentially methylated CpGs were tested for enrichment using various annotation sets. Survival analysis was conducted on the identified clusters using the log-rank test and Cox proportional hazards model. RESULTS: The clusters in both expression and methylation datasets had only moderate agreement with PAM50 calls, while our partitioning of the luminal samples had better five-year prognostic value than the luminal-A/luminal-B assignment as called by PAM50. Our analysis partitioned the expression profiles of the luminal-A samples into two biologically distinct subgroups exhibiting differential expression of immune-related genes, with one subgroup carrying significantly higher risk for five-year recurrence. Analysis of the luminal-A samples using methylation data identified a cluster of patients with poorer survival, characterized by distinct hyper-methylation of developmental genes. Cox multivariate survival analysis confirmed the prognostic significance of the two partitions after adjustment for commonly used factors such as age and pathological stage. CONCLUSIONS: Modern genomic datasets reveal large heterogeneity among luminal breast tumors. Our analysis of these data provides two prognostic gene sets that dissect and explain tumor variability within the luminal-A subgroup, thus, contributing to the advancement of subtype-specific diagnosis and treatment.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease comprising several biologically different types, exhibiting diverse responses to treatment. In the past years, gene expression profiling has led to definition of several "intrinsic subtypes" of breast cancer (basal-like, HER2-enriched, luminal-A, luminal-B and normal-like), and microarray based predictors such as PAM50 have been developed. Despite their advantage over traditional histopathological classification, precise identification of breast cancer subtypes, especially within the largest and highly variable luminal-A class, remains a challenge. In this study, we revisited the molecular classification of breast tumors using both expression and methylation data obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). METHODS: Unsupervised clustering was applied on 1148 and 679 breast cancer samples using RNA-Seq and DNA methylation data, respectively. Clusters were evaluated using clinical information and by comparison to PAM50 subtypes. Differentially expressed genes and differentially methylated CpGs were tested for enrichment using various annotation sets. Survival analysis was conducted on the identified clusters using the log-rank test and Cox proportional hazards model. RESULTS: The clusters in both expression and methylation datasets had only moderate agreement with PAM50 calls, while our partitioning of the luminal samples had better five-year prognostic value than the luminal-A/luminal-B assignment as called by PAM50. Our analysis partitioned the expression profiles of the luminal-A samples into two biologically distinct subgroups exhibiting differential expression of immune-related genes, with one subgroup carrying significantly higher risk for five-year recurrence. Analysis of the luminal-A samples using methylation data identified a cluster of patients with poorer survival, characterized by distinct hyper-methylation of developmental genes. Cox multivariate survival analysis confirmed the prognostic significance of the two partitions after adjustment for commonly used factors such as age and pathological stage. CONCLUSIONS: Modern genomic datasets reveal large heterogeneity among luminal breast tumors. Our analysis of these data provides two prognostic gene sets that dissect and explain tumor variability within the luminal-A subgroup, thus, contributing to the advancement of subtype-specific diagnosis and treatment.

BACKGROUND: The miR-200c/141 cluster has recently been implicated in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. The expression of these two miRNAs is inversely correlated with tumorigenicity and invasiveness in several human cancers. The role of these miRNAs in cancer progression is based in part on their capacity to target the EMT activators ZEB1 and ZEB2, two transcription factors, which in turn repress expression of E-cadherin. Little is known about the regulation of the mir200c/141 cluster, whose targeting has been proposed as a promising new therapy for the most aggressive tumors. FINDINGS: We show that the miR-200c/141 cluster is repressed by DNA methylation of a CpG island located in the promoter region of these miRNAs. Whereas in vitro methylation of the miR-200c/141 promoter led to shutdown of promoter activity, treatment with a demethylating agent caused transcriptional reactivation in breast cancer cells formerly lacking expression of miR-200c and miR-141. More importantly, we observed that DNA methylation of the identified miR-200c/141 promoter was tightly correlated with phenotype and the invasive capacity in a panel of 8 human breast cancer cell lines. In line with this, in vitro induction of EMT by ectopic expression of the EMT transcription factor Twist in human immortalized mammary epithelial cells (HMLE) was accompanied by increased DNA methylation and concomitant repression of the miR-200c/141 locus. CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that expression of the miR-200c/141 cluster is regulated by DNA methylation, suggesting epigenetic regulation of this miRNA locus in aggressive breast cancer cell lines as well as untransformed mammary epithelial cells. This epigenetic silencing mechanism might represent a novel component of the regulatory circuit for the maintenance of EMT programs in cancer and normal cells.. BACKGROUND: The miR-200c/141 cluster has recently been implicated in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. The expression of these two miRNAs is inversely correlated with tumorigenicity and invasiveness in several human cancers. The role of these miRNAs in cancer progression is based in part on their capacity to target the EMT activators ZEB1 and ZEB2, two transcription factors, which in turn repress expression of E-cadherin. Little is known about the regulation of the mir200c/141 cluster, whose targeting has been proposed as a promising new therapy for the most aggressive tumors. FINDINGS: We show that the miR-200c/141 cluster is repressed by DNA methylation of a CpG island located in the promoter region of these miRNAs. Whereas in vitro methylation of the miR-200c/141 promoter led to shutdown of promoter activity, treatment with a demethylating agent caused transcriptional reactivation in breast cancer cells formerly lacking expression of miR-200c and miR-141. More importantly, we observed that DNA methylation of the identified miR-200c/141 promoter was tightly correlated with phenotype and the invasive capacity in a panel of 8 human breast cancer cell lines. In line with this, in vitro induction of EMT by ectopic expression of the EMT transcription factor Twist in human immortalized mammary epithelial cells (HMLE) was accompanied by increased DNA methylation and concomitant repression of the miR-200c/141 locus. CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that expression of the miR-200c/141 cluster is regulated by DNA methylation, suggesting epigenetic regulation of this miRNA locus in aggressive breast cancer cell lines as well as untransformed mammary epithelial cells. This epigenetic silencing mechanism might represent a novel component of the regulatory circuit for the maintenance of EMT programs in cancer and normal cells.

Methylation of the p16(Ink4a) tumor suppressor gene 5'CpG island was analyzed in 104 primary breast cancer specimens using Southern blotting and methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (MSP). Eight and four tumors, respectively, showed methylation, and all MSP positive tumors were detected by Southern blotting. To investigate possible methylation not detectable by these methods, bisulphite genomic sequencing was performed in 220 clones from 14 selected tumors. Absent methylation or methylation of single CpG dinucleotides prevailed in all tumors, but of the MSP positive tumors, three contained alleles with methylation of 31 or 32 of the 32 analyzed CpG dinucleotides in the island. Partially methylated alleles were also observed. In a group with low p16(Ink4a) expression determined by Western blotting, four randomly selected tumors contained several identical clones with methylation of 15 CpG dinucleotides by bisulphite genomic sequencing but with a methylation pattern that did not support detection by either Southern blotting or MSP, increasing the potential significance of p16(Ink4a) methylation in breast cancer.. Methylation of the p16(Ink4a) tumor suppressor gene 5'CpG island was analyzed in 104 primary breast cancer specimens using Southern blotting and methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (MSP). Eight and four tumors, respectively, showed methylation, and all MSP positive tumors were detected by Southern blotting. To investigate possible methylation not detectable by these methods, bisulphite genomic sequencing was performed in 220 clones from 14 selected tumors. Absent methylation or methylation of single CpG dinucleotides prevailed in all tumors, but of the MSP positive tumors, three contained alleles with methylation of 31 or 32 of the 32 analyzed CpG dinucleotides in the island. Partially methylated alleles were also observed. In a group with low p16(Ink4a) expression determined by Western blotting, four randomly selected tumors contained several identical clones with methylation of 15 CpG dinucleotides by bisulphite genomic sequencing but with a methylation pattern that did not support detection by either Southern blotting or MSP, increasing the potential significance of p16(Ink4a) methylation in breast cancer.

Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the degree of association of BRCA1 promoter methylation with breast cancer in Asia. Methods: The study sample for the present meta-analysis was provided by published research articles on associations of BRCA1 promoter methylation with breast cancer in Asia accessed through databases on PubMed, ProQuest and EBSCO published between 1997 and November 2017. Pooled odds ratios (OR) were calculated with fixed and random-effect models. Data were processed using Review Manager 5.3 (RevMan 5.3). Results: Of a total of 475 articles, 11 studies were included in our systematic review with meta-analysis of relevant data. The results showed a highly significant association between BRCA1 promoter methylation with breast cancer in Asia (OR = 8.78 [95% CI 4.15-18.56, p < 0.00001]). Conclusion: This analysis confirmed association between BRCA1 promoter methylation and breast cancer in Asia. BRCA1 promoter assessment might be a predictive or diagnostic aid for breast cancer prediction.. Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the degree of association of BRCA1 promoter methylation with breast cancer in Asia. Methods: The study sample for the present meta-analysis was provided by published research articles on associations of BRCA1 promoter methylation with breast cancer in Asia accessed through databases on PubMed, ProQuest and EBSCO published between 1997 and November 2017. Pooled odds ratios (OR) were calculated with fixed and random-effect models. Data were processed using Review Manager 5.3 (RevMan 5.3). Results: Of a total of 475 articles, 11 studies were included in our systematic review with meta-analysis of relevant data. The results showed a highly significant association between BRCA1 promoter methylation with breast cancer in Asia (OR = 8.78 [95% CI 4.15-18.56, p < 0.00001]). Conclusion: This analysis confirmed association between BRCA1 promoter methylation and breast cancer in Asia. BRCA1 promoter assessment might be a predictive or diagnostic aid for breast cancer prediction.

To understand the biological role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast cancers, the relationship between DNA methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region and BRCA1 expression was studied using molecular biological and immunohistochemical methods. Furthermore, BRCA1 expression was compared with the expression of various cell cycle regulatory proteins and the morphological nuclear grade of cancer cells. Of 32 sporadic breast cancers investigated in this study, 10 (31%) revealed DNA methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region. The expression of BRCA1 was observed in the nuclei of cancer cells and 18 (56%) of 32 cancers were positive for BRCA1 immunoreactivity. Breast cancers with BRCA1 methylation lacked BRCA1 expression, except for only three cancers, and there was a significant inverse relationship between BRCA1 methylation and its expression in sporadic breast cancers (P = 0.043). Compared with the expression of various cell cycle regulatory proteins, breast cancers with BRCA1 methylation showed decreased expression of estrogen receptor (P = 0. 016) and p27 (P = 0.018) and increased expression of p21 (P = 0.011). Furthermore, breast cancers without BRCA1 expression or with BRCA1 methylation had a tendency to contain nuclei with higher grade. These findings indicate that BRCA1 methylation might greatly influence its expression and BRCA1 expression might play an important role in cell cycle regulation and influence the grade of malignancy of sporadic breast cancers.. To understand the biological role of BRCA1 in sporadic breast cancers, the relationship between DNA methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region and BRCA1 expression was studied using molecular biological and immunohistochemical methods. Furthermore, BRCA1 expression was compared with the expression of various cell cycle regulatory proteins and the morphological nuclear grade of cancer cells. Of 32 sporadic breast cancers investigated in this study, 10 (31%) revealed DNA methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region. The expression of BRCA1 was observed in the nuclei of cancer cells and 18 (56%) of 32 cancers were positive for BRCA1 immunoreactivity. Breast cancers with BRCA1 methylation lacked BRCA1 expression, except for only three cancers, and there was a significant inverse relationship between BRCA1 methylation and its expression in sporadic breast cancers (P = 0.043). Compared with the expression of various cell cycle regulatory proteins, breast cancers with BRCA1 methylation showed decreased expression of estrogen receptor (P = 0. 016) and p27 (P = 0.018) and increased expression of p21 (P = 0.011). Furthermore, breast cancers without BRCA1 expression or with BRCA1 methylation had a tendency to contain nuclei with higher grade. These findings indicate that BRCA1 methylation might greatly influence its expression and BRCA1 expression might play an important role in cell cycle regulation and influence the grade of malignancy of sporadic breast cancers.

Synemin (SYNM) is a type IV intermediate filament that has recently been shown to interact with the LIM domain protein zyxin, thereby possibly modulating cell adhesion and cell motility. Owing to this multiplicity of potential functions relevant to cancer development, we initiated a study to decipher SYNM expression and regulation in benign human breast tissue and breast cancer. Dot blot array analysis showed significant SYNM mRNA downregulation in 86% (n=100, P<0.001) of breast cancers compared with their normal tissue counterparts, a result that was confirmed by real-time PCR analysis (n=36, P<0.0001). Immunohistochemistry analysis showed abundant SYNM protein expression in healthy myoepithelial breast cells, whereas SYNM expression loss was evident in 57% (n=37, P<0.001) of breast cancer specimens. Next, we analyzed methylation of the SYNM promoter to clarify whether the SYNM gene can be silenced by epigenetic means. Indeed, methylation-specific PCR analysis showed tumor-specific SYNM promoter methylation in 27% (n=195) of breast cancers. As expected, SYNM promoter methylation was tightly associated (P<0.0001) with SYNM expression loss. In-depth analysis of the SYNM promoter by pyrosequencing showed extensive CpG methylation of DNA elements supposed to regulate gene transcription. Demethylating treatment of SYNM methylated breast cancer cell lines with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine clearly reestablished the SYNM expression. Statistical analysis of the patient cohort showed a close association between SYNM promoter methylation and unfavorable recurrence-free survival (hazard ratio=2.941, P=0.0282). Furthermore, SYNM methylation positively correlated with lymph node metastases (P=0.0177) and advanced tumor grade (P=0.0275), suggesting that SYNM methylation is associated with aggressive forms of breast cancer. This is the first study on the epigenetic regulation of the SYNM gene in a cancer entity. We provide first hints that SYNM could represent a novel putative breast tumor suppressor gene that is prone to epigenetic silencing. SYNM promoter methylation may become a useful predictive biomarker to stratify breast cancer patients' risk for tumor relapse.. Synemin (SYNM) is a type IV intermediate filament that has recently been shown to interact with the LIM domain protein zyxin, thereby possibly modulating cell adhesion and cell motility. Owing to this multiplicity of potential functions relevant to cancer development, we initiated a study to decipher SYNM expression and regulation in benign human breast tissue and breast cancer. Dot blot array analysis showed significant SYNM mRNA downregulation in 86% (n=100, P<0.001) of breast cancers compared with their normal tissue counterparts, a result that was confirmed by real-time PCR analysis (n=36, P<0.0001). Immunohistochemistry analysis showed abundant SYNM protein expression in healthy myoepithelial breast cells, whereas SYNM expression loss was evident in 57% (n=37, P<0.001) of breast cancer specimens. Next, we analyzed methylation of the SYNM promoter to clarify whether the SYNM gene can be silenced by epigenetic means. Indeed, methylation-specific PCR analysis showed tumor-specific SYNM promoter methylation in 27% (n=195) of breast cancers. As expected, SYNM promoter methylation was tightly associated (P<0.0001) with SYNM expression loss. In-depth analysis of the SYNM promoter by pyrosequencing showed extensive CpG methylation of DNA elements supposed to regulate gene transcription. Demethylating treatment of SYNM methylated breast cancer cell lines with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine clearly reestablished the SYNM expression. Statistical analysis of the patient cohort showed a close association between SYNM promoter methylation and unfavorable recurrence-free survival (hazard ratio=2.941, P=0.0282). Furthermore, SYNM methylation positively correlated with lymph node metastases (P=0.0177) and advanced tumor grade (P=0.0275), suggesting that SYNM methylation is associated with aggressive forms of breast cancer. This is the first study on the epigenetic regulation of the SYNM gene in a cancer entity. We provide first hints that SYNM could represent a novel putative breast tumor suppressor gene that is prone to epigenetic silencing. SYNM promoter methylation may become a useful predictive biomarker to stratify breast cancer patients' risk for tumor relapse.

The aim of this study was to unravel the role of the transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) in human breast carcinogenesis in more detail, especially the impact of ID4 promoter methylation on disease progression. Demethylating treatment of breast cancer cell lines was associated with ID4 reexpression. ID4 promoter methylation was frequently observed in primary breast cancer samples (68.9%, 117/170). We found a very tight correlation (p<0.001) between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 mRNA expression in these specimens. For breast tissue as the first tumour entity analyzed in detail, we could show a direct correlation between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 expression on both the mRNA and protein level. Interestingly, ID4 promoter methylation was a factor for unfavourable recurrence-free survival (p=0.036) and increased the patient's risk for lymph node metastases (p=0.030). Our data suggest that ID4 is a potential tumour suppressor gene in human breast tissues that undergoes epigenetic silencing during carcinogenesis, leading to an increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.. The aim of this study was to unravel the role of the transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) in human breast carcinogenesis in more detail, especially the impact of ID4 promoter methylation on disease progression. Demethylating treatment of breast cancer cell lines was associated with ID4 reexpression. ID4 promoter methylation was frequently observed in primary breast cancer samples (68.9%, 117/170). We found a very tight correlation (p<0.001) between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 mRNA expression in these specimens. For breast tissue as the first tumour entity analyzed in detail, we could show a direct correlation between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 expression on both the mRNA and protein level. Interestingly, ID4 promoter methylation was a factor for unfavourable recurrence-free survival (p=0.036) and increased the patient's risk for lymph node metastases (p=0.030). Our data suggest that ID4 is a potential tumour suppressor gene in human breast tissues that undergoes epigenetic silencing during carcinogenesis, leading to an increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of DNA binding/Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) is a critical factor for cell proliferation and differentiation in normal vertebrate development. ID4 has regulative functions for differentiation and growth of the developing brain. The role of ID1, ID2 and ID3 are expected to be oncogenic due to their overexpression in pancreatic cancer and colorectal adenocarcinomas, respectively. Aside from these findings, loss of ID3 expression was demonstrated in ovarian cancer. The aim of the present study was to reveal the factual role of ID4 in carcinogenesis in more detail, since its role for the pathogenesis of human breast cancer has been discussed controversially, assigning both oncogenic and tumour suppressive functions. METHODS: ID4 promoter methylation, ID4 mRNA expression and ID4 protein expression were analysed in primary human breast cancer specimens using methylation-specific PCR (MSP) (n=170), semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR (n=46) and immunhistochemistry (n=3), respectively. In order to demonstrate a functional association of ID4 promoter methylation with its gene silencing, we performed DNA demethylation analysis with four human breast cell lines using MSP and semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR. In addition, we performed correlations of ID4 promoter methylation with ID4 mRNA and ID4 protein expression in matched samples of breast tumour and corresponding normal tissue. We carried out statistical analyses in order to find correlations between ID4 promoter methylation and clinicopathological parameters. RESULTS: Frequent ID4 promoter methylation was observed in primary breast cancer samples (69%, 117/170). We found a tight correlation (P<0.0001) between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 expression in primary breast cancer 3 specimens. Demethylating treatment with breast cancer cell lines was associated with clear ID4 mRNA re-expression. Tumours with ID4 promoter methylation showed distinct loss of ID4 expression on both transcription and protein level. Interestingly, ID4 promoter methylation was a factor for unfavourable recurrence-free survival (P=0.036) and increased risk for lymph node metastasis (P=0.030). CONCLUSION: ID4 is indeed a novel tumour suppressor gene in normal human breast tissue and is epigenetically silenced during cancer development, indicating increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of DNA binding/Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) is a critical factor for cell proliferation and differentiation in normal vertebrate development. ID4 has regulative functions for differentiation and growth of the developing brain. The role of ID1, ID2 and ID3 are expected to be oncogenic due to their overexpression in pancreatic cancer and colorectal adenocarcinomas, respectively. Aside from these findings, loss of ID3 expression was demonstrated in ovarian cancer. The aim of the present study was to reveal the factual role of ID4 in carcinogenesis in more detail, since its role for the pathogenesis of human breast cancer has been discussed controversially, assigning both oncogenic and tumour suppressive functions. METHODS: ID4 promoter methylation, ID4 mRNA expression and ID4 protein expression were analysed in primary human breast cancer specimens using methylation-specific PCR (MSP) (n=170), semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR (n=46) and immunhistochemistry (n=3), respectively. In order to demonstrate a functional association of ID4 promoter methylation with its gene silencing, we performed DNA demethylation analysis with four human breast cell lines using MSP and semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR. In addition, we performed correlations of ID4 promoter methylation with ID4 mRNA and ID4 protein expression in matched samples of breast tumour and corresponding normal tissue. We carried out statistical analyses in order to find correlations between ID4 promoter methylation and clinicopathological parameters. RESULTS: Frequent ID4 promoter methylation was observed in primary breast cancer samples (69%, 117/170). We found a tight correlation (P<0.0001) between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 expression in primary breast cancer 3 specimens. Demethylating treatment with breast cancer cell lines was associated with clear ID4 mRNA re-expression. Tumours with ID4 promoter methylation showed distinct loss of ID4 expression on both transcription and protein level. Interestingly, ID4 promoter methylation was a factor for unfavourable recurrence-free survival (P=0.036) and increased risk for lymph node metastasis (P=0.030). CONCLUSION: ID4 is indeed a novel tumour suppressor gene in normal human breast tissue and is epigenetically silenced during cancer development, indicating increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells are modulated in reaction to tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, their specific responses to this immune pressure are unknown. In order to address this question, we first used mRNA sequencing to compare the immunophenotype of the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231 and the luminal breast cancer cell line MCF7 after both were cocultured with activated human T cells. Despite similarities in the cytokine-induced immune signatures of the two cell lines, MDA-MD-231 cells were able to transcribe more IDO1 than MCF7 cells. The two cell lines had similar upstream JAK/STAT1 signaling and IDO1 mRNA stability. However, using a series of breast cancer cell lines, IFNgamma stimulated IDO1 protein expression and enzymatic activity only in ER(-), not ER(+), cell lines. Treatment with 5-aza-deoxycytidine reversed the suppression of IDO1 expression in MCF7 cells, suggesting that DNA methylation was potentially involved in IDO1 induction. By analyzing several breast cancer datasets, we discovered subtype-specific mRNA and promoter methylation differences in IDO1, with TNBC/basal subtypes exhibiting lower methylation/higher expression and ER(+)/luminal subtypes exhibiting higher methylation/lower expression. We confirmed this trend of IDO1 methylation by bisulfite pyrosequencing breast cancer cell lines and an independent cohort of primary breast tumors. Taken together, these findings suggest that IDO1 promoter methylation regulates anti-immune responses in breast cancer subtypes and could be used as a predictive biomarker for IDO1 inhibitor-based immunotherapy. Cancer Immunol Res; 5(4); 330-44. (c)2017 AACR.. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells are modulated in reaction to tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. However, their specific responses to this immune pressure are unknown. In order to address this question, we first used mRNA sequencing to compare the immunophenotype of the TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231 and the luminal breast cancer cell line MCF7 after both were cocultured with activated human T cells. Despite similarities in the cytokine-induced immune signatures of the two cell lines, MDA-MD-231 cells were able to transcribe more IDO1 than MCF7 cells. The two cell lines had similar upstream JAK/STAT1 signaling and IDO1 mRNA stability. However, using a series of breast cancer cell lines, IFNgamma stimulated IDO1 protein expression and enzymatic activity only in ER(-), not ER(+), cell lines. Treatment with 5-aza-deoxycytidine reversed the suppression of IDO1 expression in MCF7 cells, suggesting that DNA methylation was potentially involved in IDO1 induction. By analyzing several breast cancer datasets, we discovered subtype-specific mRNA and promoter methylation differences in IDO1, with TNBC/basal subtypes exhibiting lower methylation/higher expression and ER(+)/luminal subtypes exhibiting higher methylation/lower expression. We confirmed this trend of IDO1 methylation by bisulfite pyrosequencing breast cancer cell lines and an independent cohort of primary breast tumors. Taken together, these findings suggest that IDO1 promoter methylation regulates anti-immune responses in breast cancer subtypes and could be used as a predictive biomarker for IDO1 inhibitor-based immunotherapy. Cancer Immunol Res; 5(4); 330-44. (c)2017 AACR.

DNA methylation plays a role in a variety of biological processes including embryonic development, imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, and stem cell differentiation. Tissue specific differential methylation has also been well characterized. We sought to extend these studies to create a map of differential DNA methylation between different cell types derived from a single tissue. Using three pairs of isogenic human mammary epithelial and fibroblast cells, promoter region DNA methylation was characterized using MeDIP coupled to microarray analysis. Comparison of DNA methylation between these cell types revealed nearly three thousand cell-type specific differentially methylated regions (ctDMRs). MassARRAY was performed upon 87 ctDMRs to confirm and quantify differential DNA methylation. Each of the examined regions exhibited statistically significant differences ranging from 10-70%. Gene ontology analysis revealed the overrepresentation of many transcription factors involved in developmental processes. Additionally, we have shown that ctDMRs are associated with histone related epigenetic marks and are often aberrantly methylated in breast cancer. Overall, our data suggest that there are thousands of ctDMRs which consistently exhibit differential DNA methylation and may underlie cell type specificity in human breast tissue. In addition, we describe the pathways affected by these differences and provide insight into the molecular mechanisms and physiological overlap between normal cellular differentiation and breast carcinogenesis.. DNA methylation plays a role in a variety of biological processes including embryonic development, imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, and stem cell differentiation. Tissue specific differential methylation has also been well characterized. We sought to extend these studies to create a map of differential DNA methylation between different cell types derived from a single tissue. Using three pairs of isogenic human mammary epithelial and fibroblast cells, promoter region DNA methylation was characterized using MeDIP coupled to microarray analysis. Comparison of DNA methylation between these cell types revealed nearly three thousand cell-type specific differentially methylated regions (ctDMRs). MassARRAY was performed upon 87 ctDMRs to confirm and quantify differential DNA methylation. Each of the examined regions exhibited statistically significant differences ranging from 10-70%. Gene ontology analysis revealed the overrepresentation of many transcription factors involved in developmental processes. Additionally, we have shown that ctDMRs are associated with histone related epigenetic marks and are often aberrantly methylated in breast cancer. Overall, our data suggest that there are thousands of ctDMRs which consistently exhibit differential DNA methylation and may underlie cell type specificity in human breast tissue. In addition, we describe the pathways affected by these differences and provide insight into the molecular mechanisms and physiological overlap between normal cellular differentiation and breast carcinogenesis.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D has anticarcinogenic and immune-related properties and may protect against some diseases, including breast cancer. Vitamin D affects gene transcription and may influence DNA methylation. METHODS: We studied the relationships between serum vitamin D, DNA methylation, and breast cancer using a case-cohort sample (1070 cases, 1277 in subcohort) of non-Hispanic white women. For our primary analysis, we used robust linear regression to examine the association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) and methylation within a random sample of the cohort ("subcohort"). We focused on 198 CpGs in or near seven vitamin D-related genes. For these 198 candidate CpG loci, we also examined how multiplicative interactions between methylation and 25(OH)D were associated with breast cancer risk. This was done using Cox proportional hazards models and the full case-cohort sample. We additionally conducted an exploratory epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) of the association between 25(OH)D and DNA methylation in the subcohort. RESULTS: Of the CpGs in vitamin D-related genes, cg21201924 (RXRA) had the lowest p value for association with 25(OH)D (p = 0.0004). Twenty-two other candidate CpGs were associated with 25(OH)D (p < 0.05; RXRA, NADSYN1/DHCR7, GC, or CYP27B1). We observed an interaction between 25(OH)D and methylation at cg21201924 in relation to breast cancer risk (ratio of hazard ratios = 1.22, 95% confidence interval 1.10-1.34; p = 7 x 10(-5)), indicating a larger methylation-breast cancer hazard ratio in those with high serum 25(OH)D concentrations. We also observed statistically significant (p < 0.05) interactions for six other RXRA CpGs and CpGs in CYP24A1, CYP27B1, NADSYN1/DHCR7, and VDR. In the EWAS of the subcohort, 25(OH)D was associated (q < 0.05) with methylation at cg24350360 (EPHX1; p = 3.4 x 10(-8)), cg06177555 (SPN; p = 9.8 x 10(-8)), and cg13243168 (SMARCD2; p = 2.9 x 10(-7)). CONCLUSIONS: 25(OH)D concentrations were associated with DNA methylation of CpGs in several vitamin D-related genes, with potential links to immune function-related genes. Methylation of CpGs in vitamin D-related genes may interact with 25(OH)D to affect the risk of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Vitamin D has anticarcinogenic and immune-related properties and may protect against some diseases, including breast cancer. Vitamin D affects gene transcription and may influence DNA methylation. METHODS: We studied the relationships between serum vitamin D, DNA methylation, and breast cancer using a case-cohort sample (1070 cases, 1277 in subcohort) of non-Hispanic white women. For our primary analysis, we used robust linear regression to examine the association between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) and methylation within a random sample of the cohort ("subcohort"). We focused on 198 CpGs in or near seven vitamin D-related genes. For these 198 candidate CpG loci, we also examined how multiplicative interactions between methylation and 25(OH)D were associated with breast cancer risk. This was done using Cox proportional hazards models and the full case-cohort sample. We additionally conducted an exploratory epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) of the association between 25(OH)D and DNA methylation in the subcohort. RESULTS: Of the CpGs in vitamin D-related genes, cg21201924 (RXRA) had the lowest p value for association with 25(OH)D (p = 0.0004). Twenty-two other candidate CpGs were associated with 25(OH)D (p < 0.05; RXRA, NADSYN1/DHCR7, GC, or CYP27B1). We observed an interaction between 25(OH)D and methylation at cg21201924 in relation to breast cancer risk (ratio of hazard ratios = 1.22, 95% confidence interval 1.10-1.34; p = 7 x 10(-5)), indicating a larger methylation-breast cancer hazard ratio in those with high serum 25(OH)D concentrations. We also observed statistically significant (p < 0.05) interactions for six other RXRA CpGs and CpGs in CYP24A1, CYP27B1, NADSYN1/DHCR7, and VDR. In the EWAS of the subcohort, 25(OH)D was associated (q < 0.05) with methylation at cg24350360 (EPHX1; p = 3.4 x 10(-8)), cg06177555 (SPN; p = 9.8 x 10(-8)), and cg13243168 (SMARCD2; p = 2.9 x 10(-7)). CONCLUSIONS: 25(OH)D concentrations were associated with DNA methylation of CpGs in several vitamin D-related genes, with potential links to immune function-related genes. Methylation of CpGs in vitamin D-related genes may interact with 25(OH)D to affect the risk of breast cancer.

MiRNAs are part of the epigenetic machinery, and are also epigenetically modified by DNA methylation. MiRNAs regulate expression of different genes, so any alteration in their methylation status may affect their expression. We aimed to identify methylation differences in miRNA encoding genes in breast cancer affecting women under 35 years old (BCVY), in order to identify potential biomarkers in these patients. In Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC BeadChip samples (metEPICVal), we analysed the methylation of 9,961 CpG site regulators of miRNA-encoding genes present in the array. We identified 193 differentially methylated CpG sites in BCVY (p-value < 0.05 and methylation differences +/-0.1) that regulated 83 unique miRNA encoding genes. We validated 10 CpG sites using two independent datasets based on Infinium Human Methylation 450k array. We tested gene expression of miRNAs with differential methylation in BCVY in a meta-analysis using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Clariom D and Affymetrix datasets. Five miRNAs (miR-9, miR-124-2, miR-184, miR-551b and miR-196a-1) were differently expressed (FDR p-value < 0.01). Finally, only miR-124-2 shows a significantly different gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR. MiR-124-hypomethylation presents significantly better survival rates for older patients as opposed to the worse prognosis observed in BCVY, identifying it as a potential specific survival biomarker in BCVY.. MiRNAs are part of the epigenetic machinery, and are also epigenetically modified by DNA methylation. MiRNAs regulate expression of different genes, so any alteration in their methylation status may affect their expression. We aimed to identify methylation differences in miRNA encoding genes in breast cancer affecting women under 35 years old (BCVY), in order to identify potential biomarkers in these patients. In Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC BeadChip samples (metEPICVal), we analysed the methylation of 9,961 CpG site regulators of miRNA-encoding genes present in the array. We identified 193 differentially methylated CpG sites in BCVY (p-value < 0.05 and methylation differences +/-0.1) that regulated 83 unique miRNA encoding genes. We validated 10 CpG sites using two independent datasets based on Infinium Human Methylation 450k array. We tested gene expression of miRNAs with differential methylation in BCVY in a meta-analysis using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Clariom D and Affymetrix datasets. Five miRNAs (miR-9, miR-124-2, miR-184, miR-551b and miR-196a-1) were differently expressed (FDR p-value < 0.01). Finally, only miR-124-2 shows a significantly different gene expression by quantitative real-time PCR. MiR-124-hypomethylation presents significantly better survival rates for older patients as opposed to the worse prognosis observed in BCVY, identifying it as a potential specific survival biomarker in BCVY.

Recent data have revealed that epigenetic alterations, including DNA methylation and chromatin structure changes, are among the earliest molecular abnormalities to occur during tumorigenesis. The inherent thermodynamic stability of cytosine methylation and the apparent high specificity of the alterations for disease may accelerate the development of powerful molecular diagnostics for cancer. We report a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation alterations in breast cancer. The approach efficiently identified a large collection of novel differentially DNA methylated loci (approximately 200), a subset of which was independently validated across a panel of over 230 clinical samples. The differential cytosine methylation events were independent of patient age, tumor stage, estrogen receptor status or family history of breast cancer. The power of the global approach for discovery is underscored by the identification of a single differentially methylated locus, associated with the GHSR gene, capable of distinguishing infiltrating ductal breast carcinoma from normal and benign breast tissues with a sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 96%, respectively. Notably, the frequency of these molecular abnormalities in breast tumors substantially exceeds the frequency of any other single genetic or epigenetic change reported to date. The discovery of over 50 novel DNA methylation-based biomarkers of breast cancer may provide new routes for development of DNA methylation-based diagnostics and prognostics, as well as reveal epigenetically regulated mechanism involved in breast tumorigenesis.. Recent data have revealed that epigenetic alterations, including DNA methylation and chromatin structure changes, are among the earliest molecular abnormalities to occur during tumorigenesis. The inherent thermodynamic stability of cytosine methylation and the apparent high specificity of the alterations for disease may accelerate the development of powerful molecular diagnostics for cancer. We report a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation alterations in breast cancer. The approach efficiently identified a large collection of novel differentially DNA methylated loci (approximately 200), a subset of which was independently validated across a panel of over 230 clinical samples. The differential cytosine methylation events were independent of patient age, tumor stage, estrogen receptor status or family history of breast cancer. The power of the global approach for discovery is underscored by the identification of a single differentially methylated locus, associated with the GHSR gene, capable of distinguishing infiltrating ductal breast carcinoma from normal and benign breast tissues with a sensitivity and specificity of 90% and 96%, respectively. Notably, the frequency of these molecular abnormalities in breast tumors substantially exceeds the frequency of any other single genetic or epigenetic change reported to date. The discovery of over 50 novel DNA methylation-based biomarkers of breast cancer may provide new routes for development of DNA methylation-based diagnostics and prognostics, as well as reveal epigenetically regulated mechanism involved in breast tumorigenesis.

The breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) and glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) promoters are reportedly often methylated in breast cancer tissues. Their methylation status in surrounding normal breast tissues has not been examined thoroughly although this may well be important for a better understanding of breast carcinogenesis. In this study, BRCA1 and GSTP1 promoter methylation was examined by methylation-specific PCR assay. Patients with BRCA1-methylated (n = 15) or BRCA1-unmethylated (n = 15) tumors and those with GSTP1-methylated (n = 9) or GSTP1-unmethylated (n = 11) tumors were included in the present study. Methylation status of manually micro-dissected normal epithelial cells from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of normal breast tissues adjacent to and distant from the tumors was examined at multiple sites (n = 1-5). Of the 15 patients with BRCA1-methylated tumors, 9 harbored BRCA1 promoter methylation in at least one site of the normal breast tissues. However, no BRCA1 promoter methylation was observed at any site of the normal tissues of the 15 patients with BRCA1-unmethylated tumors. No GSTP1 promoter methylation was observed in the normal tissues regardless of the methylation status of the tumors. The presence of BRCA1 promoter methylation in the normal tissues was confirmed in the epithelial cells enriched with the magnetic-activated cell sorting method. Our findings suggest that a small proportion of normal breast epithelial cells with BRCA1 promoter methylation can be precursor cells from which BRCA1-methylated breast tumors may originate. This does not apply to GSTP1 promoter methylation.. The breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) and glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) promoters are reportedly often methylated in breast cancer tissues. Their methylation status in surrounding normal breast tissues has not been examined thoroughly although this may well be important for a better understanding of breast carcinogenesis. In this study, BRCA1 and GSTP1 promoter methylation was examined by methylation-specific PCR assay. Patients with BRCA1-methylated (n = 15) or BRCA1-unmethylated (n = 15) tumors and those with GSTP1-methylated (n = 9) or GSTP1-unmethylated (n = 11) tumors were included in the present study. Methylation status of manually micro-dissected normal epithelial cells from the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of normal breast tissues adjacent to and distant from the tumors was examined at multiple sites (n = 1-5). Of the 15 patients with BRCA1-methylated tumors, 9 harbored BRCA1 promoter methylation in at least one site of the normal breast tissues. However, no BRCA1 promoter methylation was observed at any site of the normal tissues of the 15 patients with BRCA1-unmethylated tumors. No GSTP1 promoter methylation was observed in the normal tissues regardless of the methylation status of the tumors. The presence of BRCA1 promoter methylation in the normal tissues was confirmed in the epithelial cells enriched with the magnetic-activated cell sorting method. Our findings suggest that a small proportion of normal breast epithelial cells with BRCA1 promoter methylation can be precursor cells from which BRCA1-methylated breast tumors may originate. This does not apply to GSTP1 promoter methylation.

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women and hormone resistance is a challenging problem in its treatment. Loss of estrogen receptor expression is an important means of hormone resistance, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. We now demonstrate a potential role for abnormal DNA methylation in transcriptional inactivation of the estrogen receptor gene. Estrogen receptor-negative human breast cancer cells growing in culture lack estrogen receptor mRNA, have a higher capacity to methylate DNA, and display extensive methylation of the CpG island in the 5' promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene, which would correlate with silencing of expression. These results suggest that abnormal methylation could account for transcriptional inactivation of the estrogen receptor gene and subsequent hormone resistance in some human breast cancers.. Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women and hormone resistance is a challenging problem in its treatment. Loss of estrogen receptor expression is an important means of hormone resistance, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. We now demonstrate a potential role for abnormal DNA methylation in transcriptional inactivation of the estrogen receptor gene. Estrogen receptor-negative human breast cancer cells growing in culture lack estrogen receptor mRNA, have a higher capacity to methylate DNA, and display extensive methylation of the CpG island in the 5' promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene, which would correlate with silencing of expression. These results suggest that abnormal methylation could account for transcriptional inactivation of the estrogen receptor gene and subsequent hormone resistance in some human breast cancers.

Expression of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), a protease only expressed in highly invasive human breast cancer cells, is inhibited by DNA methylation of its promoter. We tested the hypothesis that up-regulation of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) will lead to methylation and silencing of uPA and inhibition of the invasiveness of metastatic breast cancer cells. Since RAS was previously shown to up-regulate DNA methylation, we examined the effects of ectopic expression of constitutively active RAS on methylation and expression of uPA. Transfection of Ha-RAS into MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells resulted in a significantly shorter cell doubling time compared with the controls. However, expression and activity of the metastatic gene uPA and invasive capacity of the cells were significantly reduced by the oncogene RAS. Silencing of uPA by RAS is mediated by a cis modification of the uPA promoter and not through an effect on a trans-acting factor, since a transiently transfected unmethylated uPA-luicferase reporter is expressed at a similar level in RAS-transfected and control cells. We then examined the levels of DNMT1 and methylated DNA-binding protein 2 (MBD2) expressions in these cells to determine whether this reduction in uPA expression is associated with changes in the DNA methylation machinery. Our results showed that ectopic expression of RAS induced DNMT1 expression and activity and inhibited MBD2 expression. Consistent with methylation-mediated repression, uPA was partially methylated in RAS-transfected cells and uPA expression was induced upon treatment of RAS transfectants with the demethylating agent 5'-azacytidine. These results therefore imply that the RAS-DNMT1 DNA methylation pathway which promotes oncogenic growth in many cancers can exert an opposite effect on the invasive capacity of the highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, thus illustrating the divergence of growth and metastasis promoting pathways in cancer. This has important implications for new therapeutic approaches to metastasizing cancer.. Expression of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), a protease only expressed in highly invasive human breast cancer cells, is inhibited by DNA methylation of its promoter. We tested the hypothesis that up-regulation of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) will lead to methylation and silencing of uPA and inhibition of the invasiveness of metastatic breast cancer cells. Since RAS was previously shown to up-regulate DNA methylation, we examined the effects of ectopic expression of constitutively active RAS on methylation and expression of uPA. Transfection of Ha-RAS into MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells resulted in a significantly shorter cell doubling time compared with the controls. However, expression and activity of the metastatic gene uPA and invasive capacity of the cells were significantly reduced by the oncogene RAS. Silencing of uPA by RAS is mediated by a cis modification of the uPA promoter and not through an effect on a trans-acting factor, since a transiently transfected unmethylated uPA-luicferase reporter is expressed at a similar level in RAS-transfected and control cells. We then examined the levels of DNMT1 and methylated DNA-binding protein 2 (MBD2) expressions in these cells to determine whether this reduction in uPA expression is associated with changes in the DNA methylation machinery. Our results showed that ectopic expression of RAS induced DNMT1 expression and activity and inhibited MBD2 expression. Consistent with methylation-mediated repression, uPA was partially methylated in RAS-transfected cells and uPA expression was induced upon treatment of RAS transfectants with the demethylating agent 5'-azacytidine. These results therefore imply that the RAS-DNMT1 DNA methylation pathway which promotes oncogenic growth in many cancers can exert an opposite effect on the invasive capacity of the highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, thus illustrating the divergence of growth and metastasis promoting pathways in cancer. This has important implications for new therapeutic approaches to metastasizing cancer.

BACKGROUND: Sporadic breast cancer like many other cancers is proposed to be a manifestation of abnormal genetic and epigenetic changes. For the past decade our laboratory has identified genes involved in DNA damage response (DDR), apoptosis and immunosurveillance pathways to influence sporadic breast cancer risk in north Indian population. Further to enhance our knowledge at the epigenetic level, we performed DNA methylation study involving 17 gene promoter regions belonging to DNA damage response (DDR) and death receptor apoptotic pathway in 162 paired normal and cancerous breast tissues from 81 sporadic breast cancer patients, using a high throughput quantitative DNA methylation analysis technology. RESULTS: The study identified five genes with statistically significant difference between normal and tumor tissues. Hypermethylation of DR5 (P=0.001), DCR1 (P=0.00001), DCR2 (P=0.0000000005) and BRCA2 (P=0.007) and hypomethylation of DR4 (P=0.011) in sporadic breast tumor tissues suggested a weak/aberrant activation of the DDR/apoptotic pathway in breast tumorigenesis. Negative correlation was observed between methylation status and transcript expression levels for TRAIL, DR4, CASP8, ATM, CHEK2, BRCA1 and BRCA2 CpG sites. Categorization of the gene methylation with respect to the clinicopathological parameters showed an increase in aberrant methylation pattern in advanced tumors. These uncharacteristic methylation patterns corresponded with decreased death receptor apoptosis (P=0.047) and DNA damage repair potential (P=0.004) in advanced tumors. The observation of BRCA2 -26 G/A 5'UTR polymorphism concomitant with the presence of methylation in the promoter region was novel and emerged as a strong candidate for susceptibility to sporadic breast tumors. CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that methylation of DDR-apoptotic gene promoters in sporadic breast cancer is not a random phenomenon. Progressive epigenetic alterations in advancing tumors result in aberrant DDR-apoptotic pathway thereby promoting tumor development. We propose, since pathological epigenetic changes of the DDR-apoptotic genes are reversible modifications, these could further be targeted for therapeutic interventions.. BACKGROUND: Sporadic breast cancer like many other cancers is proposed to be a manifestation of abnormal genetic and epigenetic changes. For the past decade our laboratory has identified genes involved in DNA damage response (DDR), apoptosis and immunosurveillance pathways to influence sporadic breast cancer risk in north Indian population. Further to enhance our knowledge at the epigenetic level, we performed DNA methylation study involving 17 gene promoter regions belonging to DNA damage response (DDR) and death receptor apoptotic pathway in 162 paired normal and cancerous breast tissues from 81 sporadic breast cancer patients, using a high throughput quantitative DNA methylation analysis technology. RESULTS: The study identified five genes with statistically significant difference between normal and tumor tissues. Hypermethylation of DR5 (P=0.001), DCR1 (P=0.00001), DCR2 (P=0.0000000005) and BRCA2 (P=0.007) and hypomethylation of DR4 (P=0.011) in sporadic breast tumor tissues suggested a weak/aberrant activation of the DDR/apoptotic pathway in breast tumorigenesis. Negative correlation was observed between methylation status and transcript expression levels for TRAIL, DR4, CASP8, ATM, CHEK2, BRCA1 and BRCA2 CpG sites. Categorization of the gene methylation with respect to the clinicopathological parameters showed an increase in aberrant methylation pattern in advanced tumors. These uncharacteristic methylation patterns corresponded with decreased death receptor apoptosis (P=0.047) and DNA damage repair potential (P=0.004) in advanced tumors. The observation of BRCA2 -26 G/A 5'UTR polymorphism concomitant with the presence of methylation in the promoter region was novel and emerged as a strong candidate for susceptibility to sporadic breast tumors. CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that methylation of DDR-apoptotic gene promoters in sporadic breast cancer is not a random phenomenon. Progressive epigenetic alterations in advancing tumors result in aberrant DDR-apoptotic pathway thereby promoting tumor development. We propose, since pathological epigenetic changes of the DDR-apoptotic genes are reversible modifications, these could further be targeted for therapeutic interventions.

BACKGROUND: The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPdelta) is a member of a highly conserved family of basic region leucine zipper transcription factors. It has properties consistent with a tumour suppressor; however, other data suggest that CEBPdelta may be involved in the metastatic process. METHODS: We analysed the expression of CEBPdelta and the methylation status of the CpG island in human breast cancer cell lines, in 107 archival cases of primary breast cancer and in two series of metastatic breast cancers using qPCR and pyrosequencing. RESULTS: Expression of CEBPdelta is downregulated in primary breast cancer by site-specific methylation in the CEBPdelta CpG island. Expression is also downregulated in 50% of cases during progression from primary carcinoma to metastatic lesions. The CEBPdelta CpG island is methylated in 81% metastatic breast cancer lesions, while methylation in the CEBPdelta CpG island in primary cancers is associated with increased risk of relapse and metastasis. CONCLUSION: CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta CpG island methylation is associated with metastasis in breast cancer. Detection of methylated CEBPdelta genomic DNA may have utility as an epigenetic biomarker of primary breast carcinomas at increased risk of relapse and metastasis.. BACKGROUND: The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (CEBPdelta) is a member of a highly conserved family of basic region leucine zipper transcription factors. It has properties consistent with a tumour suppressor; however, other data suggest that CEBPdelta may be involved in the metastatic process. METHODS: We analysed the expression of CEBPdelta and the methylation status of the CpG island in human breast cancer cell lines, in 107 archival cases of primary breast cancer and in two series of metastatic breast cancers using qPCR and pyrosequencing. RESULTS: Expression of CEBPdelta is downregulated in primary breast cancer by site-specific methylation in the CEBPdelta CpG island. Expression is also downregulated in 50% of cases during progression from primary carcinoma to metastatic lesions. The CEBPdelta CpG island is methylated in 81% metastatic breast cancer lesions, while methylation in the CEBPdelta CpG island in primary cancers is associated with increased risk of relapse and metastasis. CONCLUSION: CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta CpG island methylation is associated with metastasis in breast cancer. Detection of methylated CEBPdelta genomic DNA may have utility as an epigenetic biomarker of primary breast carcinomas at increased risk of relapse and metastasis.

BACKGROUND: Calcium is an important intracellular messenger that mediates many biological processes that are relevant to the malignant process. Calcium ion channels are key in controlling the intracellular calcium, and little is known about their role in human cancer. METHODS: We used qPCR and pyrosequencing to investigate expression and epigenetic regulation of the calcium channel regulatory subunit alpha(2)delta-3 (CACNA2D3) in breast cancer cell lines, primary cancers and metastatic lesions. RESULTS: Expression of CACNA2D3 mRNA is regulated in breast cancer cell lines by methylation in the CpG island located in the 5' regulatory region of the gene. Expression is upregulated by azacytidine (AZA) in cells with CpG island methylation but unaffected in cells lacking methylation. In primary breast carcinomas, methylation is more common in cancers, which subsequently relapse with loco-regional and, particularly, visceral metastatic disease in both oestrogen receptor-alpha (ER)-positive and -negative cases. Furthermore, CACNA2D3 CpG island is frequently methylated in breast cancer that has metastasised to the central nervous system. CONCLUSION: Methylation-dependent transcriptional silencing of CACNA2D3 may contribute to the metastatic phenotype of breast cancer. Analysis of methylation in the CACNA2D3 CpG island may have potential as a biomarker for risk of development of metastatic disease.. BACKGROUND: Calcium is an important intracellular messenger that mediates many biological processes that are relevant to the malignant process. Calcium ion channels are key in controlling the intracellular calcium, and little is known about their role in human cancer. METHODS: We used qPCR and pyrosequencing to investigate expression and epigenetic regulation of the calcium channel regulatory subunit alpha(2)delta-3 (CACNA2D3) in breast cancer cell lines, primary cancers and metastatic lesions. RESULTS: Expression of CACNA2D3 mRNA is regulated in breast cancer cell lines by methylation in the CpG island located in the 5' regulatory region of the gene. Expression is upregulated by azacytidine (AZA) in cells with CpG island methylation but unaffected in cells lacking methylation. In primary breast carcinomas, methylation is more common in cancers, which subsequently relapse with loco-regional and, particularly, visceral metastatic disease in both oestrogen receptor-alpha (ER)-positive and -negative cases. Furthermore, CACNA2D3 CpG island is frequently methylated in breast cancer that has metastasised to the central nervous system. CONCLUSION: Methylation-dependent transcriptional silencing of CACNA2D3 may contribute to the metastatic phenotype of breast cancer. Analysis of methylation in the CACNA2D3 CpG island may have potential as a biomarker for risk of development of metastatic disease.

Blood circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) is a suggested biosource of valuable clinical information for cancer, meeting the need for a minimally-invasive advancement in the route of precision medicine. In this paper, we evaluated the prognostic and predictive potential of ccfDNA parameters in early and advanced breast cancer. Groups consisted of 150 and 16 breast cancer patients under adjuvant and neoadjuvant therapy respectively, 34 patients with metastatic disease and 35 healthy volunteers. Direct quantification of ccfDNA in plasma revealed elevated concentrations correlated to the incidence of death, shorter PFS, and non-response to pharmacotherapy in the metastatic but not in the other groups. The methylation status of a panel of cancer-related genes chosen based on previous expression and epigenetic data (KLK10, SOX17, WNT5A, MSH2, GATA3) was assessed by quantitative methylation-specific PCR. All but the GATA3 gene was more frequently methylated in all the patient groups than in healthy individuals (all p < 0.05). The methylation of WNT5A was statistically significantly correlated to greater tumor size and poor prognosis characteristics and in advanced stage disease with shorter OS. In the metastatic group, also SOX17 methylation was significantly correlated to the incidence of death, shorter PFS, and OS. KLK10 methylation was significantly correlated to unfavorable clinicopathological characteristics and relapse, whereas in the adjuvant group to shorter DFI. Methylation of at least 3 or 4 genes was significantly correlated to shorter OS and no pharmacotherapy response, respectively. Classification analysis by a fully automated, machine learning software produced a single-parametric linear model using ccfDNA plasma concentration values, with great discriminating power to predict response to chemotherapy (AUC 0.803, 95% CI [0.606, 1.000]) in the metastatic group. Two more multi-parametric signatures were produced for the metastatic group, predicting survival and disease outcome. Finally, a multiple logistic regression model was constructed, discriminating between patient groups and healthy individuals. Overall, ccfDNA emerged as a highly potent predictive classifier in metastatic breast cancer. Upon prospective clinical evaluation, all the signatures produced could aid accurate prognosis.. Blood circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) is a suggested biosource of valuable clinical information for cancer, meeting the need for a minimally-invasive advancement in the route of precision medicine. In this paper, we evaluated the prognostic and predictive potential of ccfDNA parameters in early and advanced breast cancer. Groups consisted of 150 and 16 breast cancer patients under adjuvant and neoadjuvant therapy respectively, 34 patients with metastatic disease and 35 healthy volunteers. Direct quantification of ccfDNA in plasma revealed elevated concentrations correlated to the incidence of death, shorter PFS, and non-response to pharmacotherapy in the metastatic but not in the other groups. The methylation status of a panel of cancer-related genes chosen based on previous expression and epigenetic data (KLK10, SOX17, WNT5A, MSH2, GATA3) was assessed by quantitative methylation-specific PCR. All but the GATA3 gene was more frequently methylated in all the patient groups than in healthy individuals (all p < 0.05). The methylation of WNT5A was statistically significantly correlated to greater tumor size and poor prognosis characteristics and in advanced stage disease with shorter OS. In the metastatic group, also SOX17 methylation was significantly correlated to the incidence of death, shorter PFS, and OS. KLK10 methylation was significantly correlated to unfavorable clinicopathological characteristics and relapse, whereas in the adjuvant group to shorter DFI. Methylation of at least 3 or 4 genes was significantly correlated to shorter OS and no pharmacotherapy response, respectively. Classification analysis by a fully automated, machine learning software produced a single-parametric linear model using ccfDNA plasma concentration values, with great discriminating power to predict response to chemotherapy (AUC 0.803, 95% CI [0.606, 1.000]) in the metastatic group. Two more multi-parametric signatures were produced for the metastatic group, predicting survival and disease outcome. Finally, a multiple logistic regression model was constructed, discriminating between patient groups and healthy individuals. Overall, ccfDNA emerged as a highly potent predictive classifier in metastatic breast cancer. Upon prospective clinical evaluation, all the signatures produced could aid accurate prognosis.

Human lactoferrin has been found to be decreased or absent in most breast cancer and leukemia cells. In order to examine the lactoferrin gene for both structural alterations and the degree of methylation, we isolated a 2117-kilobase complementary DNA from human breast tissue. This complementary DNA was used to probe DNA extracted from normal peripheral blood, leukemia cells from patients, leukemia cell lines, and breast cancer cell lines. Immunocytochemical staining of these cells confirmed the decreased production of lactoferrin in malignancy. MspI restriction enzyme fragment patterns demonstrated genetic polymorphism which occurred in DNA from both normal and malignant cells. Polymorphism was also noted with XbaI. In this case, there were two fragment patterns that were only found in DNA from malignant cells. The degree of DNA methylation was also evaluated. The methylation pattern of DNA extracted from malignant cells was highly variable and generally less methylated than DNA extracted from normal WBCs. It is possible that the decrease in lactoferrin associated with cancer is multifactorial and includes gene structural changes as well as altered regulation. Further study is needed to determine whether the changes found in this study are the result of the malignancy or contribute to its onset or maintenance.. Human lactoferrin has been found to be decreased or absent in most breast cancer and leukemia cells. In order to examine the lactoferrin gene for both structural alterations and the degree of methylation, we isolated a 2117-kilobase complementary DNA from human breast tissue. This complementary DNA was used to probe DNA extracted from normal peripheral blood, leukemia cells from patients, leukemia cell lines, and breast cancer cell lines. Immunocytochemical staining of these cells confirmed the decreased production of lactoferrin in malignancy. MspI restriction enzyme fragment patterns demonstrated genetic polymorphism which occurred in DNA from both normal and malignant cells. Polymorphism was also noted with XbaI. In this case, there were two fragment patterns that were only found in DNA from malignant cells. The degree of DNA methylation was also evaluated. The methylation pattern of DNA extracted from malignant cells was highly variable and generally less methylated than DNA extracted from normal WBCs. It is possible that the decrease in lactoferrin associated with cancer is multifactorial and includes gene structural changes as well as altered regulation. Further study is needed to determine whether the changes found in this study are the result of the malignancy or contribute to its onset or maintenance.

The development of breast cancer is a multistep process associated with complex changes in host gene expression patterns including inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and activation of oncogenes. Critically, hereditary predisposition plays a significant role in cancer susceptibility. However, mutation of the BRCA1 gene is found only in the minority of hereditary breast cancer, which indicates that there might be alternative, novel mechanisms contributing to inactivation of the BRCA1 gene. Studies have shown that aberrant methylation of genomic DNA plays an important role in carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate whether DNA methylation may be an alternative mechanism for the inactivation of BRCA1 as an epigenetic modification of the genome and whether hereditary breast cancer has a different BRCA1 methylation phenotype pattern than sporadic breast cancer. The pattern of CpG island methylation within the promoter region of BRCA1 was assessed by bisulfite sequencing DNA from peripheral blood cells of 72 patients with hereditary predisposition but without BRCA1 mutations and 30 sporadic breast cancer controls. The overall methylation level in patients with hereditary predisposition was significantly lower than that in the sporadic control group. However, patients with hereditary predisposition showed a significantly higher methylation susceptibility for the sites -518 when compared to controls. These results suggest that there might be different BRCA1 promoter methylation levels and patterns in sporadic and hereditary breast cancer in peripheral blood DNA. These findings may facilitate the early diagnosis of hereditary breast cancer.. The development of breast cancer is a multistep process associated with complex changes in host gene expression patterns including inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and activation of oncogenes. Critically, hereditary predisposition plays a significant role in cancer susceptibility. However, mutation of the BRCA1 gene is found only in the minority of hereditary breast cancer, which indicates that there might be alternative, novel mechanisms contributing to inactivation of the BRCA1 gene. Studies have shown that aberrant methylation of genomic DNA plays an important role in carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate whether DNA methylation may be an alternative mechanism for the inactivation of BRCA1 as an epigenetic modification of the genome and whether hereditary breast cancer has a different BRCA1 methylation phenotype pattern than sporadic breast cancer. The pattern of CpG island methylation within the promoter region of BRCA1 was assessed by bisulfite sequencing DNA from peripheral blood cells of 72 patients with hereditary predisposition but without BRCA1 mutations and 30 sporadic breast cancer controls. The overall methylation level in patients with hereditary predisposition was significantly lower than that in the sporadic control group. However, patients with hereditary predisposition showed a significantly higher methylation susceptibility for the sites -518 when compared to controls. These results suggest that there might be different BRCA1 promoter methylation levels and patterns in sporadic and hereditary breast cancer in peripheral blood DNA. These findings may facilitate the early diagnosis of hereditary breast cancer.

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-obligate precursor lesion of invasive carcinoma of the breast. Current prognostic markers based on histopathological examination are unable to accurately predict which DCIS cases will progress to invasive carcinoma or recur after surgical excision. Epigenetic changes have been shown to be a significant driver of tumorigenesis, and DNA methylation of specific gene promoters provides predictive and prognostic markers in many types of cancer, including invasive breast cancer. In general, the spectrum of genes that are methylated in DCIS strongly resembles that seen in invasive ductal carcinoma. The identification of specific prognostic markers in DCIS remains elusive and awaits additional work investigating a large panel of methylatable genes by using sensitive and reproducible technologies. This review critically appraises the role of methylation in DCIS and its use as a biomarker.. Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-obligate precursor lesion of invasive carcinoma of the breast. Current prognostic markers based on histopathological examination are unable to accurately predict which DCIS cases will progress to invasive carcinoma or recur after surgical excision. Epigenetic changes have been shown to be a significant driver of tumorigenesis, and DNA methylation of specific gene promoters provides predictive and prognostic markers in many types of cancer, including invasive breast cancer. In general, the spectrum of genes that are methylated in DCIS strongly resembles that seen in invasive ductal carcinoma. The identification of specific prognostic markers in DCIS remains elusive and awaits additional work investigating a large panel of methylatable genes by using sensitive and reproducible technologies. This review critically appraises the role of methylation in DCIS and its use as a biomarker.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive breast cancer subtype with a poor prognosis. The microRNA-200 (miR-200) family has been associated with breast cancer metastasis. However, the epigenetic mechanisms underlying miR-200b repression in TNBC are not fully elucidated. In this study, we found that MYC proto-oncogene, bHLH transcription factor (MYC) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) were highly expressed in TNBC tissues compared with other breast cancer subtypes, while miR-200b expression was inhibited significantly. We demonstrated that MYC physically interacted with DNMT3A in MDA-MB-231 cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that MYC recruited DNMT3A to the miR-200b promoter, resulting in proximal CpG island hypermethylation and subsequent miR-200b repression. MiR-200b directly inhibited DNMT3A expression and formed a feedback loop in TNBC cells. MiR-200b overexpression synergistically repressed target genes including zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox factor 1, Sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2), and CD133, and inhibited the migration, invasion and mammosphere formation of TNBC cells. Our findings reveal that MYC can collaborate with DNMT3A on inducing promoter methylation and miR-200b silencing, and thereby promotes the epithelial to mesenchymal transition and mammosphere formation of TNBC cells.. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive breast cancer subtype with a poor prognosis. The microRNA-200 (miR-200) family has been associated with breast cancer metastasis. However, the epigenetic mechanisms underlying miR-200b repression in TNBC are not fully elucidated. In this study, we found that MYC proto-oncogene, bHLH transcription factor (MYC) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) were highly expressed in TNBC tissues compared with other breast cancer subtypes, while miR-200b expression was inhibited significantly. We demonstrated that MYC physically interacted with DNMT3A in MDA-MB-231 cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that MYC recruited DNMT3A to the miR-200b promoter, resulting in proximal CpG island hypermethylation and subsequent miR-200b repression. MiR-200b directly inhibited DNMT3A expression and formed a feedback loop in TNBC cells. MiR-200b overexpression synergistically repressed target genes including zinc-finger E-box-binding homeobox factor 1, Sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2), and CD133, and inhibited the migration, invasion and mammosphere formation of TNBC cells. Our findings reveal that MYC can collaborate with DNMT3A on inducing promoter methylation and miR-200b silencing, and thereby promotes the epithelial to mesenchymal transition and mammosphere formation of TNBC cells.

BACKGROUND: Immune surveillance acts as a defense mechanism in cancer, and its disruption is involved in cancer progression. DNA methylation reflects the phenotypic identity of cells and recent data suggested that DNA methylation profiles of T cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are altered in cancer progression. METHODS: We enrolled 19 females with stage 1 and 2, nine with stage 3 and 4 and 9 age matched healthy women. T cells were isolated from peripheral blood and extracted DNA was subjected to Illumina 450 K DNA methylation array analysis. Raw data was analyzed by BMIQ, ChAMP and ComBat followed by validation of identified genes by pyrosequencing. RESULTS: Analysis of data revealed ~ 10,000 sites that correlated with breast cancer progression and established a list of 89 CG sites that were highly correlated (p < 0.01, r > 0.7, r < - 0.7) with breast cancer progression. The vast majority of these sites were hypomethylated and enriched in genes with functions in the immune system. CONCLUSIONS: The study points to the possibility of using DNA methylation signatures as a noninvasive method for early detection of breast cancer and its progression which need to be tested in clinical studies.. BACKGROUND: Immune surveillance acts as a defense mechanism in cancer, and its disruption is involved in cancer progression. DNA methylation reflects the phenotypic identity of cells and recent data suggested that DNA methylation profiles of T cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are altered in cancer progression. METHODS: We enrolled 19 females with stage 1 and 2, nine with stage 3 and 4 and 9 age matched healthy women. T cells were isolated from peripheral blood and extracted DNA was subjected to Illumina 450 K DNA methylation array analysis. Raw data was analyzed by BMIQ, ChAMP and ComBat followed by validation of identified genes by pyrosequencing. RESULTS: Analysis of data revealed ~ 10,000 sites that correlated with breast cancer progression and established a list of 89 CG sites that were highly correlated (p < 0.01, r > 0.7, r < - 0.7) with breast cancer progression. The vast majority of these sites were hypomethylated and enriched in genes with functions in the immune system. CONCLUSIONS: The study points to the possibility of using DNA methylation signatures as a noninvasive method for early detection of breast cancer and its progression which need to be tested in clinical studies.

BACKGROUND: Most DNA cancer methylation markers are based on the transcriptional regulation of the promoter-gene relationship. Recently, the importance of long-range interactions between distal CpGs and target genes has been revealed. Here, we attempted to identify methylation markers for breast cancer that interact with distant genes. RESULTS: We performed integrated analysis using chromatin interactome data, methylome data, transcriptome data, and clinical information for breast cancer from public databases. Using the chromatin interactome and methylome data, we defined CpG-distant target gene relationships. After determining the differences in methylation between tumor and paired normal samples, the survival association, and the correlation between CpG methylation and distant target gene expression, we selected CpG methylation marker candidates. Using Cox proportional hazards models, we combined the selected markers and evaluated the prognostic model. We identified six methylation markers in HOXA9 and HOXA10 promoter regions and their long-range target genes. We experimentally validated the chromatin interactions, methylation status, and transcriptional regulation. A prognostic model showed that the combination of six methylation markers was highly associated with poor survival in independent datasets. According to our multivariate analysis, the prognostic model showed significantly better prognostic ability than other histological and molecular markers. CONCLUSIONS: The combination of long-range interacting HOXA9 and HOXA10 promoter CpGs predicted the survival of breast cancer patients, providing a comprehensive and novel approach for discovering new methylation markers.. BACKGROUND: Most DNA cancer methylation markers are based on the transcriptional regulation of the promoter-gene relationship. Recently, the importance of long-range interactions between distal CpGs and target genes has been revealed. Here, we attempted to identify methylation markers for breast cancer that interact with distant genes. RESULTS: We performed integrated analysis using chromatin interactome data, methylome data, transcriptome data, and clinical information for breast cancer from public databases. Using the chromatin interactome and methylome data, we defined CpG-distant target gene relationships. After determining the differences in methylation between tumor and paired normal samples, the survival association, and the correlation between CpG methylation and distant target gene expression, we selected CpG methylation marker candidates. Using Cox proportional hazards models, we combined the selected markers and evaluated the prognostic model. We identified six methylation markers in HOXA9 and HOXA10 promoter regions and their long-range target genes. We experimentally validated the chromatin interactions, methylation status, and transcriptional regulation. A prognostic model showed that the combination of six methylation markers was highly associated with poor survival in independent datasets. According to our multivariate analysis, the prognostic model showed significantly better prognostic ability than other histological and molecular markers. CONCLUSIONS: The combination of long-range interacting HOXA9 and HOXA10 promoter CpGs predicted the survival of breast cancer patients, providing a comprehensive and novel approach for discovering new methylation markers.

Although DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer have been connected to breast cancer molecular subtype, there have been no studies of the association of DNA methylation with stem cell phenotype. This study was designed to evaluate the promoter CpG island methylation of 15 genes in relation to breast cancer subtype, and to investigate whether the patterns of CpG island methylation in each subtype are associated with their cancer stem cell phenotype represented by CD44+/CD24- and ALDH1 expression. We performed MethyLight analysis of the methylation status of 15 promoter CpG island loci involved in breast cancer progression (APC, DLEC1, GRIN2B, GSTP1, HOXA1, HOXA10, IGF2, MT1G, RARB, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SCGB3A1, SFRP1, SFRP4, and TMEFF2) and determined cancer stem cell phenotype by CD44/CD24 and ALDH1 immunohistochemistry in 36 luminal A, 33 luminal B, 30 luminal-HER2, 40 HER2 enriched, and 40 basal-like subtypes of breast cancer. The number of CpG island loci methylated differed significantly between subtypes, and was highest in the luminal-HER2 subtype and lowest in the basal-like subtype. Methylation frequencies and levels in 12 of the 15 genes differed significantly between subtypes, and the basal-like subtype had significantly lower methylation frequencies and levels in nine of the genes than the other subtypes. CD44+/CD24- and ALDH1+ putative stem cell populations were most enriched in the basal-like subtype. Methylation of promoter CpG islands was significantly lower in CD44+/CD24-cell (+) tumors than in CD44+/CD24-cell (-) tumors, even within the basal-like subtype. ALDH1 (+) tumors were also less methylated than ALDH1 (-) tumors. Our findings showed that promoter CpG island methylation was different in relation to breast cancer subtype and stem cell phenotype of tumor, suggesting that breast cancers have distinct patterns of CpG island methylation according to molecular subtypes and these are associated with different stem cell phenotypes of the tumor.. Although DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer have been connected to breast cancer molecular subtype, there have been no studies of the association of DNA methylation with stem cell phenotype. This study was designed to evaluate the promoter CpG island methylation of 15 genes in relation to breast cancer subtype, and to investigate whether the patterns of CpG island methylation in each subtype are associated with their cancer stem cell phenotype represented by CD44+/CD24- and ALDH1 expression. We performed MethyLight analysis of the methylation status of 15 promoter CpG island loci involved in breast cancer progression (APC, DLEC1, GRIN2B, GSTP1, HOXA1, HOXA10, IGF2, MT1G, RARB, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SCGB3A1, SFRP1, SFRP4, and TMEFF2) and determined cancer stem cell phenotype by CD44/CD24 and ALDH1 immunohistochemistry in 36 luminal A, 33 luminal B, 30 luminal-HER2, 40 HER2 enriched, and 40 basal-like subtypes of breast cancer. The number of CpG island loci methylated differed significantly between subtypes, and was highest in the luminal-HER2 subtype and lowest in the basal-like subtype. Methylation frequencies and levels in 12 of the 15 genes differed significantly between subtypes, and the basal-like subtype had significantly lower methylation frequencies and levels in nine of the genes than the other subtypes. CD44+/CD24- and ALDH1+ putative stem cell populations were most enriched in the basal-like subtype. Methylation of promoter CpG islands was significantly lower in CD44+/CD24-cell (+) tumors than in CD44+/CD24-cell (-) tumors, even within the basal-like subtype. ALDH1 (+) tumors were also less methylated than ALDH1 (-) tumors. Our findings showed that promoter CpG island methylation was different in relation to breast cancer subtype and stem cell phenotype of tumor, suggesting that breast cancers have distinct patterns of CpG island methylation according to molecular subtypes and these are associated with different stem cell phenotypes of the tumor.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) has a pivotal role in breast carcinogenesis by associating with various cellular factors. Selective expression of additional sex comb-like 2 (ASXL2) in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells prompted us to investigate its role in chromatin modification required for ERalpha activation and breast carcinogenesis. Here, we observed that ASXL2 interacts with ligand E2-bound ERalpha and mediates ERalpha activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing analysis supports a positive role of ASXL2 at ERalpha target gene promoters. ASXL2 forms a complex with histone methylation modifiers including LSD1, UTX and MLL2, which all are recruited to the E2-responsive genes via ASXL2 and regulate methylations at histone H3 lysine 4, 9 and 27. The preferential binding of the PHD finger of ASXL2 to the dimethylated H3 lysine 4 may account for its requirement for ERalpha activation. On ASXL2 depletion, the proliferative potential of MCF7 cells and tumor size of xenograft mice decreased. Together with our finding on the higher ASXL2 expression in ERalpha-positive patients, we propose that ASXL2 could be a novel prognostic marker in breast cancer.. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) has a pivotal role in breast carcinogenesis by associating with various cellular factors. Selective expression of additional sex comb-like 2 (ASXL2) in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells prompted us to investigate its role in chromatin modification required for ERalpha activation and breast carcinogenesis. Here, we observed that ASXL2 interacts with ligand E2-bound ERalpha and mediates ERalpha activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing analysis supports a positive role of ASXL2 at ERalpha target gene promoters. ASXL2 forms a complex with histone methylation modifiers including LSD1, UTX and MLL2, which all are recruited to the E2-responsive genes via ASXL2 and regulate methylations at histone H3 lysine 4, 9 and 27. The preferential binding of the PHD finger of ASXL2 to the dimethylated H3 lysine 4 may account for its requirement for ERalpha activation. On ASXL2 depletion, the proliferative potential of MCF7 cells and tumor size of xenograft mice decreased. Together with our finding on the higher ASXL2 expression in ERalpha-positive patients, we propose that ASXL2 could be a novel prognostic marker in breast cancer.

PURPOSE: In an effort to additionally determine the global patterns of CpG island hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, we searched for aberrant promoter methylation at 10 gene loci in 54 primary breast cancer and 10 breast benign lesions. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genomic DNA sodium bisulfate converted from benign and malignant tissues was used as template in methyl-specific PCR for BRCA1, p16, ESR1, GSTP1, TRbeta1, RARbeta2, HIC1, APC, CCND2, and CDH1 genes. RESULTS: The majority of the breast cancer (85%) showed aberrant methylation in at least 1 of the loci tested with half of them displaying 3 or more methylated genes. The highest frequency of aberrant promoter methylation was found for HIC1 (48%) followed by ESR1 (46%), and CDH1 (39%). Similar methylation frequencies were detected for breast benign lesions with the exception of the CDH1 gene (P = 0.02). The analysis of methylation distribution indicates a statistically significant association between methylation of the ESR1 promoter, and methylation at CDH1, TRbeta1, GSTP1, and CCND2 loci (P < 0.03). Methylated status of the BRCA1 promoter was inversely correlated with methylation at the RARbeta2 locus (P < 0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a nonrandom distribution for promoter hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, with tumor subsets characterized by aberrant methylation of specific cancer-related genes. These breast cancer subgroups may represent separate biological entities with potential differences in sensitivity to therapy, occurrence of metastasis, and overall prognosis.. PURPOSE: In an effort to additionally determine the global patterns of CpG island hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, we searched for aberrant promoter methylation at 10 gene loci in 54 primary breast cancer and 10 breast benign lesions. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genomic DNA sodium bisulfate converted from benign and malignant tissues was used as template in methyl-specific PCR for BRCA1, p16, ESR1, GSTP1, TRbeta1, RARbeta2, HIC1, APC, CCND2, and CDH1 genes. RESULTS: The majority of the breast cancer (85%) showed aberrant methylation in at least 1 of the loci tested with half of them displaying 3 or more methylated genes. The highest frequency of aberrant promoter methylation was found for HIC1 (48%) followed by ESR1 (46%), and CDH1 (39%). Similar methylation frequencies were detected for breast benign lesions with the exception of the CDH1 gene (P = 0.02). The analysis of methylation distribution indicates a statistically significant association between methylation of the ESR1 promoter, and methylation at CDH1, TRbeta1, GSTP1, and CCND2 loci (P < 0.03). Methylated status of the BRCA1 promoter was inversely correlated with methylation at the RARbeta2 locus (P < 0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a nonrandom distribution for promoter hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, with tumor subsets characterized by aberrant methylation of specific cancer-related genes. These breast cancer subgroups may represent separate biological entities with potential differences in sensitivity to therapy, occurrence of metastasis, and overall prognosis.

The HIC1 gene is a transcriptional regulator commonly methylated in a variety of human cancer. Thirty-three invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast and 21 matched normal breast tissues were analysed for HIC1 promoter methylation, and allelic loss of a 700 kb region spanning the gene locus. At least one genetic or epigenetic abnormality was found in 27 of the carcinomas tested (82%). Promoter methylation was demonstrated in 21 carcinomas (64%), and nine normal tissues (43%), whereas 18 malignant tumors (54%) showed allelic loss. Concomitant loss of heterozigosity and promoter hypermethylation in the region spanning HIC1 was detected in eight carcinomas (24%) suggesting that in this subset of tumors both copies of the gene are functionally lost. These observations support a role for the HIC1 gene in the pathogenesis of breast ductal carcinomas.. The HIC1 gene is a transcriptional regulator commonly methylated in a variety of human cancer. Thirty-three invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast and 21 matched normal breast tissues were analysed for HIC1 promoter methylation, and allelic loss of a 700 kb region spanning the gene locus. At least one genetic or epigenetic abnormality was found in 27 of the carcinomas tested (82%). Promoter methylation was demonstrated in 21 carcinomas (64%), and nine normal tissues (43%), whereas 18 malignant tumors (54%) showed allelic loss. Concomitant loss of heterozigosity and promoter hypermethylation in the region spanning HIC1 was detected in eight carcinomas (24%) suggesting that in this subset of tumors both copies of the gene are functionally lost. These observations support a role for the HIC1 gene in the pathogenesis of breast ductal carcinomas.

Epigenetic silencing of specific genes is associated with cancer progression. CpG islands are present at higher frequency in promoter regions, their methylation leading to gene underexpression. Pyrosequencing provides sequencing analysis of genetic markers, e.g., single nucleotide polymorphisms and DNA methylation. We investigated methylation levels of a spectrum of neoplastic breast lesions, ranging from hyperplasia to invasive carcinoma obtained from the same patient. Assays were designed to analyze promoter regions of RASSF1A, GSTP1, RARbeta, and E-cadherin. Methylation increased from normal to hyperplasia, the increase being significantly higher in invasive and in situ tumors for RASSF1A (p=0.00006 and p=0.009, respectively).. Epigenetic silencing of specific genes is associated with cancer progression. CpG islands are present at higher frequency in promoter regions, their methylation leading to gene underexpression. Pyrosequencing provides sequencing analysis of genetic markers, e.g., single nucleotide polymorphisms and DNA methylation. We investigated methylation levels of a spectrum of neoplastic breast lesions, ranging from hyperplasia to invasive carcinoma obtained from the same patient. Assays were designed to analyze promoter regions of RASSF1A, GSTP1, RARbeta, and E-cadherin. Methylation increased from normal to hyperplasia, the increase being significantly higher in invasive and in situ tumors for RASSF1A (p=0.00006 and p=0.009, respectively).

PURPOSE: ERalpha and PR levels are critical determinants for breast cancer prognosis and response to endocrine therapy. Although PR is known to be silenced by methylation of its promoter, few studies have correlated methylation with PR levels and outcome in breast cancer. There is only one previous small study comparing methylation of the two PR isoforms, PRA and PRB, which are expressed from different promoters, and finally, there is no prior knowledge of associations between isoform-specific methylation and outcome. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We conducted a cohort-based study to test for associations between PRA and PRB methylation, expression, and clinical outcome in tamoxifen-treated patients (n = 500), and in patients who underwent surgery only (n = 500). Methylation and PR levels were measured by bisulfite pyrosequencing and ligand-binding assay, respectively. RESULTS: Low PR levels were significantly associated with worse outcome in all patients. PRA and PRB promoters were methylated in 9.6% and 14.1% of the breast tumors, respectively. The majority (74%) of PR-negative tumors were not methylated despite the significant inverse correlation of methylation and PR levels. PRA methylation was significantly associated with PRB methylation, although a subset of tumors had PRA only (3.9%) or PRB only (8.3%) methylated. Methylation of PRA, but not PRB was significantly associated with worse outcome in the tamoxifen-treated group. CONCLUSIONS: Mechanisms other than promoter methylation may be more dominant for loss of PR. Isoform-specific methylation events suggest independent regulation of PRA and PRB. Finally, this article shows for the first time that PRA methylation plays a unique role in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer.. PURPOSE: ERalpha and PR levels are critical determinants for breast cancer prognosis and response to endocrine therapy. Although PR is known to be silenced by methylation of its promoter, few studies have correlated methylation with PR levels and outcome in breast cancer. There is only one previous small study comparing methylation of the two PR isoforms, PRA and PRB, which are expressed from different promoters, and finally, there is no prior knowledge of associations between isoform-specific methylation and outcome. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We conducted a cohort-based study to test for associations between PRA and PRB methylation, expression, and clinical outcome in tamoxifen-treated patients (n = 500), and in patients who underwent surgery only (n = 500). Methylation and PR levels were measured by bisulfite pyrosequencing and ligand-binding assay, respectively. RESULTS: Low PR levels were significantly associated with worse outcome in all patients. PRA and PRB promoters were methylated in 9.6% and 14.1% of the breast tumors, respectively. The majority (74%) of PR-negative tumors were not methylated despite the significant inverse correlation of methylation and PR levels. PRA methylation was significantly associated with PRB methylation, although a subset of tumors had PRA only (3.9%) or PRB only (8.3%) methylated. Methylation of PRA, but not PRB was significantly associated with worse outcome in the tamoxifen-treated group. CONCLUSIONS: Mechanisms other than promoter methylation may be more dominant for loss of PR. Isoform-specific methylation events suggest independent regulation of PRA and PRB. Finally, this article shows for the first time that PRA methylation plays a unique role in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer.

Oestrogen receptor (ER) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene methylation was evaluated in neoplastic and perineoplastic breast tissues from 20 patients. In both tissues, ER gene methylation was inversely correlated with protein levels, while EGFR gene methylation was not. A preferential ER gene hypomethylation was found in neoplastic tissues, suggesting a significant role in neoplastic transformation.. Oestrogen receptor (ER) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene methylation was evaluated in neoplastic and perineoplastic breast tissues from 20 patients. In both tissues, ER gene methylation was inversely correlated with protein levels, while EGFR gene methylation was not. A preferential ER gene hypomethylation was found in neoplastic tissues, suggesting a significant role in neoplastic transformation.

Tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is a serious clinical problem in the treatment of breast cancer. Here, we found that S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and DNA methyltransferase1 (DNMT1) expression are up-regulated in TAM-resistant breast cancer (TAMR-MCF-7) cells. We further focused on whether increased SAM with DNMT1 overexpression in TAMR-MCF-7 cells lead to aberrant methylation of the PTEN gene promoter and its therapeutic potential. Methylation-specific PCR analyses revealed that two sites within the PTEN promoters were methylated in TAMR-MCF-7 cells, which resulted in down-regulation of PTEN expression and increase in Akt phosphorylation. Both the loss of PTEN expression and the increased Akt phosphorylation in TAMR-MCF-7 cells were completely reversed by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza), a DNMT inhibitor. 5-Aza inhibited the basal cell proliferation rate of TAMR-MCF-7 cells and intraperitoneal injection of 5-Aza significantly suppressed TAMR-MCF-7 tumor growth in a xenograft study. Immunohistochemistry showed that PTEN expression in TAM-resistant human breast cancer tissues was lower than in TAM-responsive cases. These results suggest that methylation of the PTEN promoter related to both SAM increase and DNMT1 activation contributes to persistent Akt activation and are potential therapeutic targets for reversing TAM resistance in breast cancer.. Tamoxifen (TAM) resistance is a serious clinical problem in the treatment of breast cancer. Here, we found that S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) and DNA methyltransferase1 (DNMT1) expression are up-regulated in TAM-resistant breast cancer (TAMR-MCF-7) cells. We further focused on whether increased SAM with DNMT1 overexpression in TAMR-MCF-7 cells lead to aberrant methylation of the PTEN gene promoter and its therapeutic potential. Methylation-specific PCR analyses revealed that two sites within the PTEN promoters were methylated in TAMR-MCF-7 cells, which resulted in down-regulation of PTEN expression and increase in Akt phosphorylation. Both the loss of PTEN expression and the increased Akt phosphorylation in TAMR-MCF-7 cells were completely reversed by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza), a DNMT inhibitor. 5-Aza inhibited the basal cell proliferation rate of TAMR-MCF-7 cells and intraperitoneal injection of 5-Aza significantly suppressed TAMR-MCF-7 tumor growth in a xenograft study. Immunohistochemistry showed that PTEN expression in TAM-resistant human breast cancer tissues was lower than in TAM-responsive cases. These results suggest that methylation of the PTEN promoter related to both SAM increase and DNMT1 activation contributes to persistent Akt activation and are potential therapeutic targets for reversing TAM resistance in breast cancer.

Molecular changes in the progressive state of tumorigenesis often include altered patterns of DNA methylation. Utilizing a series of breast epithelial cell lines, the overall 5-methylcytosine content in genomic DNA demonstrated an overall decrease when comparing two malignant cell lines (MCF-7 and T47D) with a mortal cell line (MCF 1 2M) and several derivative cell lines of the immortalized MCF10 cultures (MCF10A,-2A, -5A, A1neoT2, and 139B6). Further investigation on the methylation status of these cells lines indicated no difference in DNA methyltransferase activity, both at a protein and mRNA levels, in the nontumorigenic cell lines examined while activity was 3-10 fold higher in the tumorigenic lines (MCF7, T47D, SkBr3, MB-MDA-231, -468). Examination of the CpG island in the 5' promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene indicates that this region is unmethylated in the mortal and immortal nontumorigenic lines as well as the tumorigenic lines examined, with the exception of the estrogen receptor negative breast cell line MB-MDA-468 which appears to be partially methylated at this site. These results indicate methylation of this CpG island does not account for the inactivation of the estrogen receptor gene in immortalized nontumorigenic breast cells, suggesting another mechanism of transcriptional inactivation of ER in this environment.. Molecular changes in the progressive state of tumorigenesis often include altered patterns of DNA methylation. Utilizing a series of breast epithelial cell lines, the overall 5-methylcytosine content in genomic DNA demonstrated an overall decrease when comparing two malignant cell lines (MCF-7 and T47D) with a mortal cell line (MCF 1 2M) and several derivative cell lines of the immortalized MCF10 cultures (MCF10A,-2A, -5A, A1neoT2, and 139B6). Further investigation on the methylation status of these cells lines indicated no difference in DNA methyltransferase activity, both at a protein and mRNA levels, in the nontumorigenic cell lines examined while activity was 3-10 fold higher in the tumorigenic lines (MCF7, T47D, SkBr3, MB-MDA-231, -468). Examination of the CpG island in the 5' promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene indicates that this region is unmethylated in the mortal and immortal nontumorigenic lines as well as the tumorigenic lines examined, with the exception of the estrogen receptor negative breast cell line MB-MDA-468 which appears to be partially methylated at this site. These results indicate methylation of this CpG island does not account for the inactivation of the estrogen receptor gene in immortalized nontumorigenic breast cells, suggesting another mechanism of transcriptional inactivation of ER in this environment.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10 has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13, HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1>/=10%, P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify high-risk patients.. Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10 has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13, HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1>/=10%, P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify high-risk patients.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether the presence of polymorphisms of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma PPARgamma (Pro 1 2Ala) and PPARGC1B (Ala203Pro) modifies the association between the inorganic arsenic (iAs) methylation capacity and breast cancer (BC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mexican women were interviewed, and blood and urine samples were collected from them (cases/controls= 197/220). The concentration of urinary arsenic species and the polymorphisms of interest were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (HPLC-ICP-MS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), respectively. RESULTS: In women with a high %MMA (urinary monomethyl arsenic) and high primary methylation ratio (PM = MMA/iAs), the risk of BC was increased (odds ratio [OR]%MMA T3 vs.T1= 3.60: 95% confidence interval [CI] 2.02-6.41, ORPMI T3 vs.T1= 3.47: 95%CI 1.95-6.17), which was maintained after adjusting for polymorphisms. No significant interactions were observed between the polymorphisms and the arsenic variables on the risk of BC. CONCLUSION: Pro 12Ala and Ala203Pro polymorphisms did not modify the association between the iAs methylation capacity and BC.. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether the presence of polymorphisms of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma PPARgamma (Pro 1 2Ala) and PPARGC1B (Ala203Pro) modifies the association between the inorganic arsenic (iAs) methylation capacity and breast cancer (BC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mexican women were interviewed, and blood and urine samples were collected from them (cases/controls= 197/220). The concentration of urinary arsenic species and the polymorphisms of interest were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (HPLC-ICP-MS) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), respectively. RESULTS: In women with a high %MMA (urinary monomethyl arsenic) and high primary methylation ratio (PM = MMA/iAs), the risk of BC was increased (odds ratio [OR]%MMA T3 vs.T1= 3.60: 95% confidence interval [CI] 2.02-6.41, ORPMI T3 vs.T1= 3.47: 95%CI 1.95-6.17), which was maintained after adjusting for polymorphisms. No significant interactions were observed between the polymorphisms and the arsenic variables on the risk of BC. CONCLUSION: Pro 12Ala and Ala203Pro polymorphisms did not modify the association between the iAs methylation capacity and BC.

The genetic alterations associated with breast carcinogenesis are well known. On the contrary epigenetic alterations in hereditary breast cancer are a new field. Two epigenetic mechanisms have emerged as the most critical players in transcriptional regulation in breast cancer: the methylation of DNA and microRNA interference. In this review we will focus on recent findings on gene silencing caused by DNA methylation and microRNA to explore the potential role of these epigenetic changes in the understanding of hereditary breast cancer. Moreover we will describe the same alterations in basal-like breast cancer and in triple-negative breast cancer, since their phenotypes have similarities with BRCA1-mutated tumors. To underline the possibility that some epigenetic alterations could also be used as potential epigenetic biomarkers of drug sensitivity or resistance, we will discuss the more common therapies in hereditary breast cancer that could also be applied to breast cancer with basal-like or triple negative phenotypes.. The genetic alterations associated with breast carcinogenesis are well known. On the contrary epigenetic alterations in hereditary breast cancer are a new field. Two epigenetic mechanisms have emerged as the most critical players in transcriptional regulation in breast cancer: the methylation of DNA and microRNA interference. In this review we will focus on recent findings on gene silencing caused by DNA methylation and microRNA to explore the potential role of these epigenetic changes in the understanding of hereditary breast cancer. Moreover we will describe the same alterations in basal-like breast cancer and in triple-negative breast cancer, since their phenotypes have similarities with BRCA1-mutated tumors. To underline the possibility that some epigenetic alterations could also be used as potential epigenetic biomarkers of drug sensitivity or resistance, we will discuss the more common therapies in hereditary breast cancer that could also be applied to breast cancer with basal-like or triple negative phenotypes.

Epigenetic regulation, has been very scarcely explored in familial breast cancer (BC). In the present study RASSF1A and RAR beta promoter methylation and miR17, miR21, miR 124, and let-7a expression were investigated to highlight possible differences of epigenetic regulation between male and female familial BC, also in comparison with sporadic BC. These epigenetic alterations were studied in 56 familial BC patients (27 males and 29 females) and in 16 female sporadic cases. RASSF1A resulted more frequently methylated in men than women (76% vs. 28%, respectively, P = 0.0001), while miR17 and let-7a expression frequency was higher in women than in men (miR17: 66% in women vs. 41% in men, P < 0.05; let-7a: 45% in women vs. 15% in men, P = 0.015). RASSF1A methylation affected 27.6% of familial BC while 83% of familial cases showed high expression of the gene (P = 0.025); on the contrary, only 17% of familial BC presented RAR beta methylation and 55% of familial cases overexpressed this gene (P = 0.005). Moreover, miR17, miR21, and let-7a resulted significantly overexpressed in familial compared to sporadic BC. RASSF1A overexpression (86% vs. 65%, P = 0.13) and RAR beta overexpression (57% vs. 32%, P = 0.11) were higher in BRCA1/2 carriers even if not statistical significance was reached. BRCA mutation carriers also demonstrated significant overexpression of: miR17 (93% vs. 35%, P = 0.0001), let-7a (64% vs. 16%, P = 0.002), and of miR21 (100% vs. 65%, P = 0.008). In conclusion, the present data suggest the involvement of RASSF1A in familial male BC, while miR17 and let-7a seem to be implied in familial female BC.. Epigenetic regulation, has been very scarcely explored in familial breast cancer (BC). In the present study RASSF1A and RAR beta promoter methylation and miR17, miR21, miR 124, and let-7a expression were investigated to highlight possible differences of epigenetic regulation between male and female familial BC, also in comparison with sporadic BC. These epigenetic alterations were studied in 56 familial BC patients (27 males and 29 females) and in 16 female sporadic cases. RASSF1A resulted more frequently methylated in men than women (76% vs. 28%, respectively, P = 0.0001), while miR17 and let-7a expression frequency was higher in women than in men (miR17: 66% in women vs. 41% in men, P < 0.05; let-7a: 45% in women vs. 15% in men, P = 0.015). RASSF1A methylation affected 27.6% of familial BC while 83% of familial cases showed high expression of the gene (P = 0.025); on the contrary, only 17% of familial BC presented RAR beta methylation and 55% of familial cases overexpressed this gene (P = 0.005). Moreover, miR17, miR21, and let-7a resulted significantly overexpressed in familial compared to sporadic BC. RASSF1A overexpression (86% vs. 65%, P = 0.13) and RAR beta overexpression (57% vs. 32%, P = 0.11) were higher in BRCA1/2 carriers even if not statistical significance was reached. BRCA mutation carriers also demonstrated significant overexpression of: miR17 (93% vs. 35%, P = 0.0001), let-7a (64% vs. 16%, P = 0.002), and of miR21 (100% vs. 65%, P = 0.008). In conclusion, the present data suggest the involvement of RASSF1A in familial male BC, while miR17 and let-7a seem to be implied in familial female BC.

The methylation of the human oestrogen receptor (ER) gene was analysed by restriction enzymes in normal and neoplastic human breast tissues and cell lines. CCGG sequences in regions inside the gene, which are methylated both in normal breast and in tissues that are not the target of the oestrogen, are hypomethylated in 30% of tumours, both ER+ and ER- carcinomas. Moreover, 5' sequences of the gene, which are hypomethylated in normal breast and not in tissues not the target of oestrogen, are methylated to a lower degree in ER+ carcinomas, whereas they are methylated to a greater degree in ER- carcinomas. However, the same region is equally hypomethylated in both ER+ and ER- cancer cell lines. Our results indicate that in breast carcinomas ER DNA methylation is deranged, and in cancer cell lines is different from that observed in primary tumours. Furthermore, the abnormal methylation in the 5' end seems to be related to abnormal expression, namely diffuse hypomethylation in carcinomas with high ER content and hypermethylation in carcinomas without ER. These findings support our previous hypothesis that DNA methylation could be involved in the control of ER gene expression and demonstrate that abnormal ER gene methylation is a typical feature of breast cancers.. The methylation of the human oestrogen receptor (ER) gene was analysed by restriction enzymes in normal and neoplastic human breast tissues and cell lines. CCGG sequences in regions inside the gene, which are methylated both in normal breast and in tissues that are not the target of the oestrogen, are hypomethylated in 30% of tumours, both ER+ and ER- carcinomas. Moreover, 5' sequences of the gene, which are hypomethylated in normal breast and not in tissues not the target of oestrogen, are methylated to a lower degree in ER+ carcinomas, whereas they are methylated to a greater degree in ER- carcinomas. However, the same region is equally hypomethylated in both ER+ and ER- cancer cell lines. Our results indicate that in breast carcinomas ER DNA methylation is deranged, and in cancer cell lines is different from that observed in primary tumours. Furthermore, the abnormal methylation in the 5' end seems to be related to abnormal expression, namely diffuse hypomethylation in carcinomas with high ER content and hypermethylation in carcinomas without ER. These findings support our previous hypothesis that DNA methylation could be involved in the control of ER gene expression and demonstrate that abnormal ER gene methylation is a typical feature of breast cancers.

AIM: The goal of this study is to characterize the specific methylation profile triggered by DNMT3B protein isoforms expressed at different levels in breast cell lines. MATERIALS & METHODS: Microarray DNA methylation data were analyzed and associated with functional genome annotation data. RESULTS: A large spectrum of DNMT3B3/DNMT3B2 expression ratio values was observed in parental breast cell lines. According to their methylation profiles, hierarchical clustering of untransfected cell lines revealed clustering based on their ER/PR status. Overexpression of DNMT3B3 triggered methylation changes of thousands of CpG sites in breast cells. Based on the trend of methylation changes, the results suggest an antiproliferative action of the DNMT3B3 isoform through a dominant negative effect on its wild-type counterpart DNMT3B2. CONCLUSION: This study revealed specific pathways modulated by DNMT3B isoforms, which could regulate cell proliferation and other biological mechanisms. This illustrates the importance of multiple interactions between isoforms in the complexity of methylation processes.. AIM: The goal of this study is to characterize the specific methylation profile triggered by DNMT3B protein isoforms expressed at different levels in breast cell lines. MATERIALS & METHODS: Microarray DNA methylation data were analyzed and associated with functional genome annotation data. RESULTS: A large spectrum of DNMT3B3/DNMT3B2 expression ratio values was observed in parental breast cell lines. According to their methylation profiles, hierarchical clustering of untransfected cell lines revealed clustering based on their ER/PR status. Overexpression of DNMT3B3 triggered methylation changes of thousands of CpG sites in breast cells. Based on the trend of methylation changes, the results suggest an antiproliferative action of the DNMT3B3 isoform through a dominant negative effect on its wild-type counterpart DNMT3B2. CONCLUSION: This study revealed specific pathways modulated by DNMT3B isoforms, which could regulate cell proliferation and other biological mechanisms. This illustrates the importance of multiple interactions between isoforms in the complexity of methylation processes.

Basal-like breast cancer is a molecularly distinct subtype of breast cancer that is highly aggressive and has a poor prognosis. MicroRNA-29c (miR-29c) has been shown to be significantly down-regulated in basal-like breast tumors and to be involved in cell invasion and sensitivity to chemotherapy. However, little is known about the genetic and regulatory factors contributing to the altered expression of miR-29c in basal-like breast cancer. We here report that epigenetic modifications at the miR-29c promoter, rather than copy number variation of the gene, may drive the lower expression of miR-29c in basal-like breast cancer. Bisulfite sequencing of CpG sites in the miR-29c promoter region showed higher methylation in basal-like breast cancer cell lines compared to luminal subtype cells with a significant inverse correlation between expression and methylation of miR-29c. Analysis of primary breast tumors using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset confirmed significantly higher levels of methylation of the promoter in basal-like breast tumors compared to all other subtypes. Furthermore, inhibition of CpG methylation with 5-aza-CdR increases miR-29c expression in basal-like breast cancer cells. Flourescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) revealed chromosomal abnormalities at miR-29c loci in breast cancer cell lines, but with no correlation between copy number variation and expression of miR-29c. Our data demonstrated that dysregulation of miR-29c in basal-like breast cancer cells may be in part driven by methylation at CpG sites. Epigenetic control of the miR-29c promoter by epigenetic modifiers may provide a potential therapeutic target to overcome the aggressive behavior of these cancers.. Basal-like breast cancer is a molecularly distinct subtype of breast cancer that is highly aggressive and has a poor prognosis. MicroRNA-29c (miR-29c) has been shown to be significantly down-regulated in basal-like breast tumors and to be involved in cell invasion and sensitivity to chemotherapy. However, little is known about the genetic and regulatory factors contributing to the altered expression of miR-29c in basal-like breast cancer. We here report that epigenetic modifications at the miR-29c promoter, rather than copy number variation of the gene, may drive the lower expression of miR-29c in basal-like breast cancer. Bisulfite sequencing of CpG sites in the miR-29c promoter region showed higher methylation in basal-like breast cancer cell lines compared to luminal subtype cells with a significant inverse correlation between expression and methylation of miR-29c. Analysis of primary breast tumors using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset confirmed significantly higher levels of methylation of the promoter in basal-like breast tumors compared to all other subtypes. Furthermore, inhibition of CpG methylation with 5-aza-CdR increases miR-29c expression in basal-like breast cancer cells. Flourescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) revealed chromosomal abnormalities at miR-29c loci in breast cancer cell lines, but with no correlation between copy number variation and expression of miR-29c. Our data demonstrated that dysregulation of miR-29c in basal-like breast cancer cells may be in part driven by methylation at CpG sites. Epigenetic control of the miR-29c promoter by epigenetic modifiers may provide a potential therapeutic target to overcome the aggressive behavior of these cancers.

The GSTP1 gene encodes for a detoxification enzyme involved in protecting cells from carcinogens. In breast cancer, GSTP1 polymorphisms may produce lower effective enzyme detoxification properties and GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation may result in inactivation of GSTP1 expression. We therefore hypothesized an influence on progression of breast cancer. To study the effect of GSTP1 polymorphisms and CpG-island hypermethylation on GSTP1 promoter, PCR-RFLP and methylation-specific PCR techniques were used with 41 Thai breast-cancer patients. Associations between the codon 105 (A to G) genetic polymorphism, CpG-island hypermethylation, and clinico-pathological parameters were analyzed. GSTP1 hypermethylation was found in 26% of cases and the GSTP1 polymorphism in 14%. GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly associated with breast cancer; lymph-node metastasis (P = 0.02) while GSTP1 polymorphism status significantly varied with progesterone receptor positivity (P = 0.04). No association was found between the GSTP1 polymorphism and methylation status. The results indicated that CpG-island hypermethylation of the GSTP1 promoter is associated with a biologically aggressive phenotype, but may not be related to the codon 105 (A to G) gene polymorphism in breast-cancer patients.. The GSTP1 gene encodes for a detoxification enzyme involved in protecting cells from carcinogens. In breast cancer, GSTP1 polymorphisms may produce lower effective enzyme detoxification properties and GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation may result in inactivation of GSTP1 expression. We therefore hypothesized an influence on progression of breast cancer. To study the effect of GSTP1 polymorphisms and CpG-island hypermethylation on GSTP1 promoter, PCR-RFLP and methylation-specific PCR techniques were used with 41 Thai breast-cancer patients. Associations between the codon 105 (A to G) genetic polymorphism, CpG-island hypermethylation, and clinico-pathological parameters were analyzed. GSTP1 hypermethylation was found in 26% of cases and the GSTP1 polymorphism in 14%. GSTP1 hypermethylation was significantly associated with breast cancer; lymph-node metastasis (P = 0.02) while GSTP1 polymorphism status significantly varied with progesterone receptor positivity (P = 0.04). No association was found between the GSTP1 polymorphism and methylation status. The results indicated that CpG-island hypermethylation of the GSTP1 promoter is associated with a biologically aggressive phenotype, but may not be related to the codon 105 (A to G) gene polymorphism in breast-cancer patients.

DNA methylation is a critical mechanism of epigenetic modification involved in gene expression programming, that can promote the development of several cancers, including breast cancer. The methylation of CpG islands by DNA methyltransferases is reversible and has been shown to modify the transcriptional activity of key proliferation genes or transcription factors involved in suppression or promotion of cell growth. Indeed, aberrant methylation found in gene promoters is a hallmark of cancer that could be used as non-intrusive biomarker in body fluids such as blood and plasma for early detection of breast cancer. Many biomarker genes have been evaluated for breast cancer detection. However, in the absence of a unique biomarker having the sufficient specificity and sensitivity, a panel of multiple genes should be used. Treatments targeting aberrant methylation by DNA methyltransferase inhibitors, which trigger re-expression of silenced genes, are now available and allow for better treatment efficiency.. DNA methylation is a critical mechanism of epigenetic modification involved in gene expression programming, that can promote the development of several cancers, including breast cancer. The methylation of CpG islands by DNA methyltransferases is reversible and has been shown to modify the transcriptional activity of key proliferation genes or transcription factors involved in suppression or promotion of cell growth. Indeed, aberrant methylation found in gene promoters is a hallmark of cancer that could be used as non-intrusive biomarker in body fluids such as blood and plasma for early detection of breast cancer. Many biomarker genes have been evaluated for breast cancer detection. However, in the absence of a unique biomarker having the sufficient specificity and sensitivity, a panel of multiple genes should be used. Treatments targeting aberrant methylation by DNA methyltransferase inhibitors, which trigger re-expression of silenced genes, are now available and allow for better treatment efficiency.

In the present study, eighty-four breast cancer patients were randomized to receive a daily supplement of 100 mg co-enzyme Q10, 10 mg riboflavin and 50 mg niacin (CoRN), one dosage per d along with 10 mg tamoxifen twice per d. A significant increase in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase levels and disappearance of RASSF1A DNA methylation patterns were found in patients treated with supplement therapy along with tamoxifen compared to untreated breast cancer patients and tamoxifen alone-treated patients. An increase in DNA repair enzymes and disappearance of DNA methylation patterns attributes to reduction in tumour burden and may suggest good prognosis and efficacy of the treatment.. In the present study, eighty-four breast cancer patients were randomized to receive a daily supplement of 100 mg co-enzyme Q10, 10 mg riboflavin and 50 mg niacin (CoRN), one dosage per d along with 10 mg tamoxifen twice per d. A significant increase in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase levels and disappearance of RASSF1A DNA methylation patterns were found in patients treated with supplement therapy along with tamoxifen compared to untreated breast cancer patients and tamoxifen alone-treated patients. An increase in DNA repair enzymes and disappearance of DNA methylation patterns attributes to reduction in tumour burden and may suggest good prognosis and efficacy of the treatment.

During tumorigenesis, cancer-related genes can be silenced by aberrant DNA methylation and by changes in chromatin structure. It has been reported that 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a potent inhibitor of DNA methylation, in combination with histone deacetylase inhibitors, can produce a synergistic reactivation of these genes. The aim of our study was to investigate the in vitro antineoplastic activity of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in combination with depsipeptide, a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor, against MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 human breast carcinoma cell lines. We observed that the combination of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and depsipeptide produced a synergistic antineoplastic effect against these tumor cells as compared to either agent administered alone. We also investigated the effect of this drug combination on the activation of maspin and gelsolin expression. These 2 genes whose function is to suppress tumor metastasis have been reported to be silenced by epigenetic events in breast cancer. Using semi-quantitative RT-PCR, we observed that 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in combination with depsipeptide produced a greater reactivation of both maspin and gelsolin as compared to each agent alone. The synergistic interaction between 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and depsipeptide on breast carcinoma cell lines provides a rationale to investigate this interesting drug combination in future clinical trials on patients with advanced breast cancer.. During tumorigenesis, cancer-related genes can be silenced by aberrant DNA methylation and by changes in chromatin structure. It has been reported that 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a potent inhibitor of DNA methylation, in combination with histone deacetylase inhibitors, can produce a synergistic reactivation of these genes. The aim of our study was to investigate the in vitro antineoplastic activity of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in combination with depsipeptide, a potent histone deacetylase inhibitor, against MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435 human breast carcinoma cell lines. We observed that the combination of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and depsipeptide produced a synergistic antineoplastic effect against these tumor cells as compared to either agent administered alone. We also investigated the effect of this drug combination on the activation of maspin and gelsolin expression. These 2 genes whose function is to suppress tumor metastasis have been reported to be silenced by epigenetic events in breast cancer. Using semi-quantitative RT-PCR, we observed that 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine in combination with depsipeptide produced a greater reactivation of both maspin and gelsolin as compared to each agent alone. The synergistic interaction between 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and depsipeptide on breast carcinoma cell lines provides a rationale to investigate this interesting drug combination in future clinical trials on patients with advanced breast cancer.

The methylation of promoter CpG islands and interactions between microRNAs (miRNAs) and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of target genes are considered two crucial epigenetic mechanisms for inducing gene and pathway deregulation in tumors. Here, the expression levels of seven cancer-associated 3p genes (RASSF1(isoform A), RARB(isoform 2), SEMA3B, RHOA, GPX1, NKIRAS1, and CHL1) and their predicted regulator miRNAs (miR-129-2, miR-9-1) were analyzed in breast (BC, 40 samples) and ovarian (OC, 14 samples) cancers using RT-PCR and qPCR. We first revealed a negative correlation between the level of the miR-129-2 precursor and RASSF1(A) and GPX1 mRNA levels in BC (Spearman's correlation coefficient (rs) was - 0.26 in both cases). Similar results were observed for the miR-129-2 precursor and the RASSF1(A), GPX1, RARB(2), and CHL1 genes in OC (rs was in the range - 0.48 to - 0.54). Using methylation-specific PCR, a significant correlation was shown between promoter hypermethylation and the down-regulation of the RASSF1(A), GPX1, RARB(2), SEMA3B, MIR-129-2, and MIR-9-1 genes in BC (rs = 0.41 to 0.75) and of the RASSF1(A) gene in OC (rs = 0.67). We first demonstrated a high hypermethylation frequency of MIR-129-2 and SEMA3B (up to 45 to 48%) in both BC (69 samples) and OC (41 samples). Moreover, we observed a positive correlation between the hypermethylation of MIR-129-2 and the up-regulation of the RASSF1(A) and GPX1 genes in BC (rs = 0.38 and 0.42, respectively). QPCR analysis of the expression of RASSF1(A) and mature miR-129-2 in additional BC sample set (24 samples) revealed a negative correlation between them (rs = - 0.41) that strengthened the results obtained during the analysis of miR-129-2 precursor level. In summary, the obtained data indicate the involvement of methylation in the down-regulation of the studied coding and miRNA genes and suggest the involvement of miR-129-2 in the deregulation of RASSF1(A) via a direct interaction or/and mediators in common pathways (according to KEGG, Gene Ontology (FDR < 0.01), and GeneCards data) in the examined gynecological tumors.. The methylation of promoter CpG islands and interactions between microRNAs (miRNAs) and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of target genes are considered two crucial epigenetic mechanisms for inducing gene and pathway deregulation in tumors. Here, the expression levels of seven cancer-associated 3p genes (RASSF1(isoform A), RARB(isoform 2), SEMA3B, RHOA, GPX1, NKIRAS1, and CHL1) and their predicted regulator miRNAs (miR-129-2, miR-9-1) were analyzed in breast (BC, 40 samples) and ovarian (OC, 14 samples) cancers using RT-PCR and qPCR. We first revealed a negative correlation between the level of the miR-129-2 precursor and RASSF1(A) and GPX1 mRNA levels in BC (Spearman's correlation coefficient (rs) was - 0.26 in both cases). Similar results were observed for the miR-129-2 precursor and the RASSF1(A), GPX1, RARB(2), and CHL1 genes in OC (rs was in the range - 0.48 to - 0.54). Using methylation-specific PCR, a significant correlation was shown between promoter hypermethylation and the down-regulation of the RASSF1(A), GPX1, RARB(2), SEMA3B, MIR-129-2, and MIR-9-1 genes in BC (rs = 0.41 to 0.75) and of the RASSF1(A) gene in OC (rs = 0.67). We first demonstrated a high hypermethylation frequency of MIR-129-2 and SEMA3B (up to 45 to 48%) in both BC (69 samples) and OC (41 samples). Moreover, we observed a positive correlation between the hypermethylation of MIR-129-2 and the up-regulation of the RASSF1(A) and GPX1 genes in BC (rs = 0.38 and 0.42, respectively). QPCR analysis of the expression of RASSF1(A) and mature miR-129-2 in additional BC sample set (24 samples) revealed a negative correlation between them (rs = - 0.41) that strengthened the results obtained during the analysis of miR-129-2 precursor level. In summary, the obtained data indicate the involvement of methylation in the down-regulation of the studied coding and miRNA genes and suggest the involvement of miR-129-2 in the deregulation of RASSF1(A) via a direct interaction or/and mediators in common pathways (according to KEGG, Gene Ontology (FDR < 0.01), and GeneCards data) in the examined gynecological tumors.

The methylation of promoter CpG islands and the interaction between microRNAs (miRNAs) and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of target genes are considered two crucial mechanisms for gene and pathway deregulation in malignant tumors. The aim of this study was to analyze the role of promoter methylation in altering the expression of 13 miRNAs that are associated with breast cancer (BC): miR-124, -125b, -127, -132, -137, -148a, -191, -193a, -203, -212, -34b, -375, -9. The role of methylation in the deregulation of these miRNAs has not been previously assessed in the representative set of BC samples. We used a set of 58 paired (tumor/normal) breast tissue samples and methylation-specific PCR to demonstrate significant aberrations in the methylation patterns of 9 miRNA genes. In particular, we observed hypermethylation of MIR-127, -132, and -193a, and hypomethylation of MIR-191 for the first time. Using quantitative PCR, we established a strong correlation between promoter methylation and expression levels for 12 miRNA genes (all except MIR-212); this finding demonstrates the functional importance of altered methylation patterns. We also performed a correlation analysis between expression levels of the 13 miRNAs and 5 cancer-associated genes, namely RASSF1(A), CHL1, APAF1, DAPK1, and BCL2, which were predicted as targets for these miRNAs, to investigate the impact of these miRNAs on these genes with key cellular functions in BC. Significant negative correlation was revealed for the following miRNA-mRNA pairs: miR-127-5p and DAPK1, miR-375 and RASSF1(A), and miR-124-3p and BCL2. Additionally, we also found a strong association between hypermethylation of MIR-127 and MIR-125b-1 and BC progression, particularly metastasis. Thus, our findings provide evidence for the significant role of methylation in the deregulation of 12 miRNA genes in BC, identify putative novel functional miRNA-mRNA pairs, and suggest MIR-127 and MIR-125b-1 hypermethylation to be potential biomarkers of BC metastasis.. The methylation of promoter CpG islands and the interaction between microRNAs (miRNAs) and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of target genes are considered two crucial mechanisms for gene and pathway deregulation in malignant tumors. The aim of this study was to analyze the role of promoter methylation in altering the expression of 13 miRNAs that are associated with breast cancer (BC): miR-124, -125b, -127, -132, -137, -148a, -191, -193a, -203, -212, -34b, -375, -9. The role of methylation in the deregulation of these miRNAs has not been previously assessed in the representative set of BC samples. We used a set of 58 paired (tumor/normal) breast tissue samples and methylation-specific PCR to demonstrate significant aberrations in the methylation patterns of 9 miRNA genes. In particular, we observed hypermethylation of MIR-127, -132, and -193a, and hypomethylation of MIR-191 for the first time. Using quantitative PCR, we established a strong correlation between promoter methylation and expression levels for 12 miRNA genes (all except MIR-212); this finding demonstrates the functional importance of altered methylation patterns. We also performed a correlation analysis between expression levels of the 13 miRNAs and 5 cancer-associated genes, namely RASSF1(A), CHL1, APAF1, DAPK1, and BCL2, which were predicted as targets for these miRNAs, to investigate the impact of these miRNAs on these genes with key cellular functions in BC. Significant negative correlation was revealed for the following miRNA-mRNA pairs: miR-127-5p and DAPK1, miR-375 and RASSF1(A), and miR-124-3p and BCL2. Additionally, we also found a strong association between hypermethylation of MIR-127 and MIR-125b-1 and BC progression, particularly metastasis. Thus, our findings provide evidence for the significant role of methylation in the deregulation of 12 miRNA genes in BC, identify putative novel functional miRNA-mRNA pairs, and suggest MIR-127 and MIR-125b-1 hypermethylation to be potential biomarkers of BC metastasis.

Methylation of tumor suppressor genes has been implicated in breast cancer development. However, methylation profiles of different breast lesions, subtypes of carcinoma in particular, have not been examined in detail. In this study, we use methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to generate gene methylation profiles of different breast lesions and to test the clinical utility of such profiles. We examined the methylation status of three genes, RARbeta2, RASSF1A, and cyclin D2, on 102 samples of breast tissue, from benign (n = 36), to in situ carcinoma (n = 21), to invasive carcinoma (n = 45). We found that almost all cases of invasive carcinoma (96%) contained at least one methylated gene from our panel, whereas gene methylation was less common among benign lesions (42%) and in situ carcinoma (76%). Of the three genes, cyclin D2 methylation was most specific for malignancy because only 1 of 35 benign cases was methylated at this gene (1 case was not informative). The major histologic subtypes of invasive carcinoma show similar methylation profiles in the genes examined. We next performed MSP analysis on archival breast fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy samples and corresponding surgical biopsy specimens and found a high concordance between the two types of specimens. We then analyzed 17 breast FNA biopsy samples with an indeterminate diagnosis. In this setting, MSP had a high specificity (100%) and modest sensitivity (67%) for identifying malignancy.. Methylation of tumor suppressor genes has been implicated in breast cancer development. However, methylation profiles of different breast lesions, subtypes of carcinoma in particular, have not been examined in detail. In this study, we use methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to generate gene methylation profiles of different breast lesions and to test the clinical utility of such profiles. We examined the methylation status of three genes, RARbeta2, RASSF1A, and cyclin D2, on 102 samples of breast tissue, from benign (n = 36), to in situ carcinoma (n = 21), to invasive carcinoma (n = 45). We found that almost all cases of invasive carcinoma (96%) contained at least one methylated gene from our panel, whereas gene methylation was less common among benign lesions (42%) and in situ carcinoma (76%). Of the three genes, cyclin D2 methylation was most specific for malignancy because only 1 of 35 benign cases was methylated at this gene (1 case was not informative). The major histologic subtypes of invasive carcinoma show similar methylation profiles in the genes examined. We next performed MSP analysis on archival breast fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy samples and corresponding surgical biopsy specimens and found a high concordance between the two types of specimens. We then analyzed 17 breast FNA biopsy samples with an indeterminate diagnosis. In this setting, MSP had a high specificity (100%) and modest sensitivity (67%) for identifying malignancy.

PURPOSE: The X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor (XEDAR) is a novel receptor of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that binds to ectodysplasin-A2 (EDA-A2) and induces cell death. The purpose of this study was to determine the tumor-suppressive potential of XEDAR in the development of breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed the expression of XEDAR in breast cancer cell lines and tumor samples using quantitative real-time PCR analysis and immunoblotting. We analyzed the human XEDAR gene promoter for the presence of any CpG island and examined its methylation status using methylation-specific real-time PCR. We examined the effect of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on the expression of XEDAR and sensitivity to EDA-A2-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: Expression of XEDAR, but not EDA-A2, was downregulated in most tumorigenic breast cancer cell lines and tumor samples. Loss of XEDAR expression correlated with the hypermethylation of its promoter. Ectopic expression of XEDAR in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in significant induction of apoptosis and reduction in colony formation. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored XEDAR expression in breast cancer cell lines with methylated XEDAR promoter and sensitized them to EDA-A2-induced cell death. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that XEDAR expression is downregulated in most breast cancers via promoter methylation, which may contribute to accelerated tumor development by blocking EDA-A2-induced cell death. XEDAR may represent a novel breast tumor suppressor gene, and restoration of its expression by treatment with DNA demethylating agents may represent an attractive approach for the treatment of breast cancer.. PURPOSE: The X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor (XEDAR) is a novel receptor of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that binds to ectodysplasin-A2 (EDA-A2) and induces cell death. The purpose of this study was to determine the tumor-suppressive potential of XEDAR in the development of breast cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed the expression of XEDAR in breast cancer cell lines and tumor samples using quantitative real-time PCR analysis and immunoblotting. We analyzed the human XEDAR gene promoter for the presence of any CpG island and examined its methylation status using methylation-specific real-time PCR. We examined the effect of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on the expression of XEDAR and sensitivity to EDA-A2-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: Expression of XEDAR, but not EDA-A2, was downregulated in most tumorigenic breast cancer cell lines and tumor samples. Loss of XEDAR expression correlated with the hypermethylation of its promoter. Ectopic expression of XEDAR in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in significant induction of apoptosis and reduction in colony formation. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored XEDAR expression in breast cancer cell lines with methylated XEDAR promoter and sensitized them to EDA-A2-induced cell death. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that XEDAR expression is downregulated in most breast cancers via promoter methylation, which may contribute to accelerated tumor development by blocking EDA-A2-induced cell death. XEDAR may represent a novel breast tumor suppressor gene, and restoration of its expression by treatment with DNA demethylating agents may represent an attractive approach for the treatment of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical efficacy of APC gene promoter methylation in serum as a biomarker for breast cancer (BC) diagnosis. METHODS: Two reviewers systematically searched online resources to identify the publications relevant to APC gene promoter methylation and BC. The data of true positive, false positive, false negative, and true negative were extracted from each included study and pooled for diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and summary receiver operating characteristic curve. RESULTS: Twelve studies finally fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were included in this meta-analysis. The diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratio, diagnostic odds ratio, and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve were 0.20 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.17-0.23), 0.96 (95% CI 0.93-0.97), 3.69 (95% CI 1.60-8.50), 0.83 (95% CI 0.75-0.92), 4.58 (95% CI 1.85-11.37) and 0.80, respectively. A Deeks' funnel plot and Egger's line regression test (t = 1.43, P = 0.18) indicated no publication bias was present. CONCLUSION: Because of low sensitivity, APC gene promoter methylation in serum was not suitable for BC screening. However, as specificity was very high, detection of serum APC gene promoter methylation could be used as tool to confirm BC.. BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical efficacy of APC gene promoter methylation in serum as a biomarker for breast cancer (BC) diagnosis. METHODS: Two reviewers systematically searched online resources to identify the publications relevant to APC gene promoter methylation and BC. The data of true positive, false positive, false negative, and true negative were extracted from each included study and pooled for diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and summary receiver operating characteristic curve. RESULTS: Twelve studies finally fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were included in this meta-analysis. The diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratio, diagnostic odds ratio, and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve were 0.20 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.17-0.23), 0.96 (95% CI 0.93-0.97), 3.69 (95% CI 1.60-8.50), 0.83 (95% CI 0.75-0.92), 4.58 (95% CI 1.85-11.37) and 0.80, respectively. A Deeks' funnel plot and Egger's line regression test (t = 1.43, P = 0.18) indicated no publication bias was present. CONCLUSION: Because of low sensitivity, APC gene promoter methylation in serum was not suitable for BC screening. However, as specificity was very high, detection of serum APC gene promoter methylation could be used as tool to confirm BC.

Unregulated cell growth, a major hallmark of cancer, is coupled with telomere shortening. Measurement of telomere length could provide important information on cell replication and proliferation state in cancer tissues. Telomere shortening and its potential correlation with downregulation of cell-cycle regulatory elements were studied by the examination of relative telomere length and methylation status of the TP53, P21 and P16 promoters in tissues from breast cancer patients. Telomere length was measured in 104 samples (52 tumors and paired adjacent normal breast tissues) by quantitative PCR. Methylation profile of selected genes was analyzed in all samples using a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). Our results demonstrated a significant shortening of tumor telomere regions compared with paired adjacent normal tissues (P<0.001). Similarly, telomere lengths were significantly shorter in advanced stage cases and in those with higher histological grades (P<0.05). Telomere shortening in cancer tissues was correlated with a different level of hypermethylation in the TP53, P21 and P16 promoters (r=-0.33, P=0.001; r=-0.70, P<0.0001 and r=-0.71, P<0.0001, respectively). The results suggested that inactivation of p16/Rb and/or p53/p21 pathways by hypermethylation may be linked to critical telomere shortening, leading to genome instability and ultimately to malignant transformation. Thus, telomere shortening and promoter hypermethylation of related genes both might serve as breast cancer biomarkers.. Unregulated cell growth, a major hallmark of cancer, is coupled with telomere shortening. Measurement of telomere length could provide important information on cell replication and proliferation state in cancer tissues. Telomere shortening and its potential correlation with downregulation of cell-cycle regulatory elements were studied by the examination of relative telomere length and methylation status of the TP53, P21 and P16 promoters in tissues from breast cancer patients. Telomere length was measured in 104 samples (52 tumors and paired adjacent normal breast tissues) by quantitative PCR. Methylation profile of selected genes was analyzed in all samples using a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). Our results demonstrated a significant shortening of tumor telomere regions compared with paired adjacent normal tissues (P<0.001). Similarly, telomere lengths were significantly shorter in advanced stage cases and in those with higher histological grades (P<0.05). Telomere shortening in cancer tissues was correlated with a different level of hypermethylation in the TP53, P21 and P16 promoters (r=-0.33, P=0.001; r=-0.70, P<0.0001 and r=-0.71, P<0.0001, respectively). The results suggested that inactivation of p16/Rb and/or p53/p21 pathways by hypermethylation may be linked to critical telomere shortening, leading to genome instability and ultimately to malignant transformation. Thus, telomere shortening and promoter hypermethylation of related genes both might serve as breast cancer biomarkers.

Over the last decade, the rapidly expanding interest in the involvement of DNA methylation in developmental mechanisms, human diseases, and malignancies has highlighted the need for an accurate, quantitative, and high-throughput assay. Existing methods are limited and are often too laborious for high-throughput analysis or inadequate for quantitative analysis of methylation. Recently, a MassCLEAVE assay has been developed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry to analyze base-specific methylation patterns after bisulfite conversion. To find an efficient and more cost-effective high-throughput method for analyzing the methylation profile in breast cancer, we developed a method that allows for the simultaneous detection of multiple target CpG residues by using thymidine-specific cleavage mass array on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight silicon chips. We used this novel quantitative approach for the analysis of DNA methylation patterns of four tumor suppressor genes in 96 breast tissue samples from 48 patients with breast cancer. Each individual contributed a breast cancer specimen and corresponding adjacent normal tissue. We evaluated the accuracy of the approach and implemented critical improvements in experimental design.. Over the last decade, the rapidly expanding interest in the involvement of DNA methylation in developmental mechanisms, human diseases, and malignancies has highlighted the need for an accurate, quantitative, and high-throughput assay. Existing methods are limited and are often too laborious for high-throughput analysis or inadequate for quantitative analysis of methylation. Recently, a MassCLEAVE assay has been developed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry to analyze base-specific methylation patterns after bisulfite conversion. To find an efficient and more cost-effective high-throughput method for analyzing the methylation profile in breast cancer, we developed a method that allows for the simultaneous detection of multiple target CpG residues by using thymidine-specific cleavage mass array on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight silicon chips. We used this novel quantitative approach for the analysis of DNA methylation patterns of four tumor suppressor genes in 96 breast tissue samples from 48 patients with breast cancer. Each individual contributed a breast cancer specimen and corresponding adjacent normal tissue. We evaluated the accuracy of the approach and implemented critical improvements in experimental design.

Alterations of DNA methylation patterns have been suggested as biomarkers for diagnostics and therapy of cancers. Every novel discovery in the epigenetic landscape and every development of an improved approach for accurate analysis of the events may offer new opportunity for the management of patients. Using a novel high-throughput mass spectrometry on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) silico-chips, we determined semiquantitative methylation changes of 22 candidate genes in breast cancer tissues. For the first time we analysed the methylation status of a total of 42 528 CpG dinucleotides on 22 genes in 96 different paraffin-embedded tissues (48 breast cancerous tissues and 48 paired normal tissues). A two-way hierarchical cluster analysis was used to classify methylation profiles. In this study, 10 hypermethylated genes (APC, BIN1, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESRb, GSTP1, P16, P21 and TIMP3) were identified to distinguish between cancerous and normal tissues according to the extent of methylation. Individual assessment of the methylation status for each CpG dinucleotide indicated that cytosine hypermethylation in the cancerous tissue samples was mostly located near the consensus sequences of the transcription factor binding sites. These hypermethylated genes may serve as biomarkers for clinical molecular diagnosis and targeted treatments of patients with breast cancer.. Alterations of DNA methylation patterns have been suggested as biomarkers for diagnostics and therapy of cancers. Every novel discovery in the epigenetic landscape and every development of an improved approach for accurate analysis of the events may offer new opportunity for the management of patients. Using a novel high-throughput mass spectrometry on matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) silico-chips, we determined semiquantitative methylation changes of 22 candidate genes in breast cancer tissues. For the first time we analysed the methylation status of a total of 42 528 CpG dinucleotides on 22 genes in 96 different paraffin-embedded tissues (48 breast cancerous tissues and 48 paired normal tissues). A two-way hierarchical cluster analysis was used to classify methylation profiles. In this study, 10 hypermethylated genes (APC, BIN1, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESRb, GSTP1, P16, P21 and TIMP3) were identified to distinguish between cancerous and normal tissues according to the extent of methylation. Individual assessment of the methylation status for each CpG dinucleotide indicated that cytosine hypermethylation in the cancerous tissue samples was mostly located near the consensus sequences of the transcription factor binding sites. These hypermethylated genes may serve as biomarkers for clinical molecular diagnosis and targeted treatments of patients with breast cancer.

One decade early onset of the breast cancer in Iranian females was reported but the basis of the observed difference has remained unclear and difference in gene silencing by epigenetic processes is suggested. Hence, this study was sought to map the methylation status of ER gene CpG islands and its impact on clinicopathological factors of triple negative and non-triple negative ductal cell carcinoma of the breast in Iranian females. Surgically resected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast tissues from sixty Iranian women with confirmed invasive ductal carcinoma were assessed by methylation-specific PCR using primer sets encompassing some of the 29 CpGs across the ER gene CpG island. The estrogen and progesterone receptors, Her-2 overexpression, and nuclear accumulation of P53 were examined using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Methylated ER3, ER4, and ER5 were found in 41.7, 11.3, and 43.3% of the samples, respectively. Significantly higher methylation of ER4 was found in the tumors with nuclear accumulation of P53, and significantly higher methylation of ER5 was found in patients with lymph node involvement and tumor with bigger size or higher grades. Furthermore, significantly higher rate of ER5 methylation was found in patients with Her-2+ tumors and in postmenopausal patients with ER-, PgR-, or ER-/PgR- tumors. However, no significant difference in ERs methylation status was found between triple negative and non-triple negative tumors in pre- and postmenopausal patients. Findings revealed that aberrant hypermethylation of ER-a gene frequently occur in Iranian women with invasive ductal cell carcinoma of the breast. However, methylation of different CpG islands produced a diverse impact on the prognosis of breast cancer, and ER5 was found to be the most frequently methylated region in the Iranian women, and could serve as a marker of poor prognosis.. One decade early onset of the breast cancer in Iranian females was reported but the basis of the observed difference has remained unclear and difference in gene silencing by epigenetic processes is suggested. Hence, this study was sought to map the methylation status of ER gene CpG islands and its impact on clinicopathological factors of triple negative and non-triple negative ductal cell carcinoma of the breast in Iranian females. Surgically resected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast tissues from sixty Iranian women with confirmed invasive ductal carcinoma were assessed by methylation-specific PCR using primer sets encompassing some of the 29 CpGs across the ER gene CpG island. The estrogen and progesterone receptors, Her-2 overexpression, and nuclear accumulation of P53 were examined using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Methylated ER3, ER4, and ER5 were found in 41.7, 11.3, and 43.3% of the samples, respectively. Significantly higher methylation of ER4 was found in the tumors with nuclear accumulation of P53, and significantly higher methylation of ER5 was found in patients with lymph node involvement and tumor with bigger size or higher grades. Furthermore, significantly higher rate of ER5 methylation was found in patients with Her-2+ tumors and in postmenopausal patients with ER-, PgR-, or ER-/PgR- tumors. However, no significant difference in ERs methylation status was found between triple negative and non-triple negative tumors in pre- and postmenopausal patients. Findings revealed that aberrant hypermethylation of ER-a gene frequently occur in Iranian women with invasive ductal cell carcinoma of the breast. However, methylation of different CpG islands produced a diverse impact on the prognosis of breast cancer, and ER5 was found to be the most frequently methylated region in the Iranian women, and could serve as a marker of poor prognosis.

Caveolin-1 (Cav1) is an integral membrane, scaffolding protein found in plasma membrane invaginations (caveolae). Cav1 regulates multiple cancer-associated processes. In breast cancer, a tumor suppressive role for Cav1 has been suggested; however, Cav1 is frequently overexpressed in aggressive breast cancer subtypes, suggesting an oncogenic function in advanced-stage disease. To further delineate Cav1 function in breast cancer progression, we evaluated its expression levels among a panel of cell lines representing a spectrum of breast cancer phenotypes. In basal-like (the most aggressive BC subtype) breast cancer cells, Cav1 was consistently upregulated, and positively correlated with increased cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, and migration and invasion. To identify mechanisms of Cav1 gene regulation, we compared DNA methylation levels within promoter 'CpG islands' (CGIs) with 'CGI shores', recently described regions that flank CGIs with less CG-density. Integration of genome-wide DNA methylation profiles ('methylomes') with Cav1 expression in 30 breast cancer cell lines showed that differential methylation of CGI shores, but not CGIs, significantly regulated Cav1 expression. In breast cancer cell lines having low Cav1 expression (despite promoter CGI hypomethylation), we found that treatment with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor induced Cav1 expression via CGI shore demethylation. In addition, further methylome assessments revealed that breast cancer aggressiveness associated with Cav1 CGI shore methylation levels, with shore hypermethylation in minimally aggressive, luminal breast cancer cells and shore hypomethylation in highly aggressive, basal-like cells. Cav1 CGI shore methylation was also observed in human breast tumors, and overall survival rates of breast cancer patients lacking estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) negatively correlated with Cav1 expression. Based on this first study of Cav1 (a potential oncogene) CGI shore methylation, we suggest this phenomenon may represent a new prognostic marker for ERalpha-negative, basal-like breast cancer.. Caveolin-1 (Cav1) is an integral membrane, scaffolding protein found in plasma membrane invaginations (caveolae). Cav1 regulates multiple cancer-associated processes. In breast cancer, a tumor suppressive role for Cav1 has been suggested; however, Cav1 is frequently overexpressed in aggressive breast cancer subtypes, suggesting an oncogenic function in advanced-stage disease. To further delineate Cav1 function in breast cancer progression, we evaluated its expression levels among a panel of cell lines representing a spectrum of breast cancer phenotypes. In basal-like (the most aggressive BC subtype) breast cancer cells, Cav1 was consistently upregulated, and positively correlated with increased cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, and migration and invasion. To identify mechanisms of Cav1 gene regulation, we compared DNA methylation levels within promoter 'CpG islands' (CGIs) with 'CGI shores', recently described regions that flank CGIs with less CG-density. Integration of genome-wide DNA methylation profiles ('methylomes') with Cav1 expression in 30 breast cancer cell lines showed that differential methylation of CGI shores, but not CGIs, significantly regulated Cav1 expression. In breast cancer cell lines having low Cav1 expression (despite promoter CGI hypomethylation), we found that treatment with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor induced Cav1 expression via CGI shore demethylation. In addition, further methylome assessments revealed that breast cancer aggressiveness associated with Cav1 CGI shore methylation levels, with shore hypermethylation in minimally aggressive, luminal breast cancer cells and shore hypomethylation in highly aggressive, basal-like cells. Cav1 CGI shore methylation was also observed in human breast tumors, and overall survival rates of breast cancer patients lacking estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) negatively correlated with Cav1 expression. Based on this first study of Cav1 (a potential oncogene) CGI shore methylation, we suggest this phenomenon may represent a new prognostic marker for ERalpha-negative, basal-like breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer formation is associated with frequent changes in DNA methylation but the extent of very early alterations in DNA methylation and the biological significance of cancer-associated epigenetic changes need further elucidation. METHODS: Pyrosequencing was done on bisulfite-treated DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections containing invasive tumor and paired samples of histologically normal tissue adjacent to the cancers as well as control reduction mammoplasty samples from unaffected women. The DNA regions studied were promoters (BRCA1, CD44, ESR1, GSTM2, GSTP1, MAGEA1, MSI1, NFE2L3, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SIX3 and TFF1), far-upstream regions (EN1, PAX3, PITX2, and SGK1), introns (APC, EGFR, LHX2, RFX1 and SOX9) and the LINE-1 and satellite 2 DNA repeats. These choices were based upon previous literature or publicly available DNA methylome profiles. The percent methylation was averaged across neighboring CpG sites. RESULTS: Most of the assayed gene regions displayed hypermethylation in cancer vs. adjacent tissue but the TFF1 and MAGEA1 regions were significantly hypomethylated (p </=0.001). Importantly, six of the 16 regions examined in a large collection of patients (105 - 129) and in 15-18 reduction mammoplasty samples were already aberrantly methylated in adjacent, histologically normal tissue vs. non-cancerous mammoplasty samples (p </=0.01). In addition, examination of transcriptome and DNA methylation databases indicated that methylation at three non-promoter regions (far-upstream EN1 and PITX2 and intronic LHX2) was associated with higher gene expression, unlike the inverse associations between cancer DNA hypermethylation and cancer-altered gene expression usually reported. These three non-promoter regions also exhibited normal tissue-specific hypermethylation positively associated with differentiation-related gene expression (in muscle progenitor cells vs. many other types of normal cells). The importance of considering the exact DNA region analyzed and the gene structure was further illustrated by bioinformatic analysis of an alternative promoter/intron gene region for APC. CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed the frequent DNA methylation changes in invasive breast cancer at a variety of genome locations and found evidence for an extensive field effect in breast cancer. In addition, we illustrate the power of combining publicly available whole-genome databases with a candidate gene approach to study cancer epigenetics.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer formation is associated with frequent changes in DNA methylation but the extent of very early alterations in DNA methylation and the biological significance of cancer-associated epigenetic changes need further elucidation. METHODS: Pyrosequencing was done on bisulfite-treated DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections containing invasive tumor and paired samples of histologically normal tissue adjacent to the cancers as well as control reduction mammoplasty samples from unaffected women. The DNA regions studied were promoters (BRCA1, CD44, ESR1, GSTM2, GSTP1, MAGEA1, MSI1, NFE2L3, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SIX3 and TFF1), far-upstream regions (EN1, PAX3, PITX2, and SGK1), introns (APC, EGFR, LHX2, RFX1 and SOX9) and the LINE-1 and satellite 2 DNA repeats. These choices were based upon previous literature or publicly available DNA methylome profiles. The percent methylation was averaged across neighboring CpG sites. RESULTS: Most of the assayed gene regions displayed hypermethylation in cancer vs. adjacent tissue but the TFF1 and MAGEA1 regions were significantly hypomethylated (p </=0.001). Importantly, six of the 16 regions examined in a large collection of patients (105 - 129) and in 15-18 reduction mammoplasty samples were already aberrantly methylated in adjacent, histologically normal tissue vs. non-cancerous mammoplasty samples (p </=0.01). In addition, examination of transcriptome and DNA methylation databases indicated that methylation at three non-promoter regions (far-upstream EN1 and PITX2 and intronic LHX2) was associated with higher gene expression, unlike the inverse associations between cancer DNA hypermethylation and cancer-altered gene expression usually reported. These three non-promoter regions also exhibited normal tissue-specific hypermethylation positively associated with differentiation-related gene expression (in muscle progenitor cells vs. many other types of normal cells). The importance of considering the exact DNA region analyzed and the gene structure was further illustrated by bioinformatic analysis of an alternative promoter/intron gene region for APC. CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed the frequent DNA methylation changes in invasive breast cancer at a variety of genome locations and found evidence for an extensive field effect in breast cancer. In addition, we illustrate the power of combining publicly available whole-genome databases with a candidate gene approach to study cancer epigenetics.

BACKGROUND: YAP, a potent oncogene and major downstream effector of the mammalian Hippo tumor suppressor pathway can act as either oncogene or tumor suppressor gene based on the type of tissue involved. Despite various studies, the role and mechanism through which YAP mediates its tumor suppressor or oncogenic effects are not yet fully understood. Therefore in the present study we aimed to investigate YAP at DNA, mRNA and protein level and also attempted to correlate our molecular findings with various clinicopathological variables of the patients. METHODS: The study comprised of a total 137 genetically unrelated women with sporadic breast cancer cases and normal adjacent tissues not infiltrated with tumor. Mutation of YAP gene was analyzed by automated DNA sequencing. YAP promoter methylation was studied using MS-PCR. Expression at mRNA and protein level was studied using qPCR and IHC respectively. RESULTS: In our study YAP mRNA expression was found to be 8.65 +/- 6.17 fold downregulated in 67.15% cases. The expression of YAP when analyzed at the protein level by IHC was found to be absent in 78.83% cases. Results from MS-PCR analysis showed that YAP promoter methylation plays an important role in declining the expression of YAP protein. The absence of YAP protein coincided with 86.60% methylated cases thereby showing a very strong correlation (p = 0.001). We also investigated YAP mutation at the major check point sites in the Hippo pathway and observed no mutation. A significant association was observed on correlating mRNA expression with clinical stages (p = 0.038) and protein expression with ER status (p = 0.018) among Indian breast cancer patients. CONCLUSION: The expression of YAP was found to be downregulated in response to aberrant promoter methylation. The downregulation of YAP are consistent with previous studies suggesting it to have a tumor suppressive role in breast cancer. We did not observe any mutation at the major check point sites in the Hippo pathway.. BACKGROUND: YAP, a potent oncogene and major downstream effector of the mammalian Hippo tumor suppressor pathway can act as either oncogene or tumor suppressor gene based on the type of tissue involved. Despite various studies, the role and mechanism through which YAP mediates its tumor suppressor or oncogenic effects are not yet fully understood. Therefore in the present study we aimed to investigate YAP at DNA, mRNA and protein level and also attempted to correlate our molecular findings with various clinicopathological variables of the patients. METHODS: The study comprised of a total 137 genetically unrelated women with sporadic breast cancer cases and normal adjacent tissues not infiltrated with tumor. Mutation of YAP gene was analyzed by automated DNA sequencing. YAP promoter methylation was studied using MS-PCR. Expression at mRNA and protein level was studied using qPCR and IHC respectively. RESULTS: In our study YAP mRNA expression was found to be 8.65 +/- 6.17 fold downregulated in 67.15% cases. The expression of YAP when analyzed at the protein level by IHC was found to be absent in 78.83% cases. Results from MS-PCR analysis showed that YAP promoter methylation plays an important role in declining the expression of YAP protein. The absence of YAP protein coincided with 86.60% methylated cases thereby showing a very strong correlation (p = 0.001). We also investigated YAP mutation at the major check point sites in the Hippo pathway and observed no mutation. A significant association was observed on correlating mRNA expression with clinical stages (p = 0.038) and protein expression with ER status (p = 0.018) among Indian breast cancer patients. CONCLUSION: The expression of YAP was found to be downregulated in response to aberrant promoter methylation. The downregulation of YAP are consistent with previous studies suggesting it to have a tumor suppressive role in breast cancer. We did not observe any mutation at the major check point sites in the Hippo pathway.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation (DNAm) age was found to be an indicator for all-cause mortality, cancer incidence, and longevity, but no study has involved in the associations of DNAm age with the prognosis of breast cancer. METHODS: We retrieved information of 1076 breast cancer patients from Genomic Data Commons (GDC) data portal on March 30, 2017, including breast cancer DNAm profiling, demographic features, clinicopathological parameters, recurrence, and all-cause fatality. Horvath's method was applied to calculate the DNAm age. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to test the associations between DNAm age of the cancerous tissues and the prognosis (recurrence of breast cancer and all-cause fatality) with or without adjusting for chronological age and clinicopathological parameters. RESULTS: The DNAm age was markedly decelerated in the patients who were premenopausal, ER or PR negative, HER2-enriched or basal-like than their counterparts. In the first five-year follow-up dataset for survival, every ten-year increase in DNAm age was associated with a 15% decrease in fatality; subjects with DNAm age in the second (HR: 0.52; 95%CI: 0.29-0.92), the third (HR: 0.49; 95%CI: 0.27-0.87) and the fourth quartile (HR: 0.38; 95%CI: 0.20-0.72) had significant longer survival time than those in the first quartile. In the first five-year follow-up dataset for recurrence, every ten-year increase in DNAm age was associated with a 14% decrease of the recurrence; in the categorical analysis, a clear dose-response was shown (P for trend =0.02) and the fourth quartile was associated with a longer recurrence free survival (HR: 0.32; 95%CI: 0.14-0.74). In the full follow-up dataset, similar results were obtained. CONCLUSIONS: DNAm age of breast cancer tissue, which associated with menopausal status and pathological features, was a strong independent predictor of the prognosis. It was suggested that the prognosis of breast cancer was related to intrinsic biological changes and specific molecular targets for treatment of breast cancer may be implicit.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation (DNAm) age was found to be an indicator for all-cause mortality, cancer incidence, and longevity, but no study has involved in the associations of DNAm age with the prognosis of breast cancer. METHODS: We retrieved information of 1076 breast cancer patients from Genomic Data Commons (GDC) data portal on March 30, 2017, including breast cancer DNAm profiling, demographic features, clinicopathological parameters, recurrence, and all-cause fatality. Horvath's method was applied to calculate the DNAm age. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to test the associations between DNAm age of the cancerous tissues and the prognosis (recurrence of breast cancer and all-cause fatality) with or without adjusting for chronological age and clinicopathological parameters. RESULTS: The DNAm age was markedly decelerated in the patients who were premenopausal, ER or PR negative, HER2-enriched or basal-like than their counterparts. In the first five-year follow-up dataset for survival, every ten-year increase in DNAm age was associated with a 15% decrease in fatality; subjects with DNAm age in the second (HR: 0.52; 95%CI: 0.29-0.92), the third (HR: 0.49; 95%CI: 0.27-0.87) and the fourth quartile (HR: 0.38; 95%CI: 0.20-0.72) had significant longer survival time than those in the first quartile. In the first five-year follow-up dataset for recurrence, every ten-year increase in DNAm age was associated with a 14% decrease of the recurrence; in the categorical analysis, a clear dose-response was shown (P for trend =0.02) and the fourth quartile was associated with a longer recurrence free survival (HR: 0.32; 95%CI: 0.14-0.74). In the full follow-up dataset, similar results were obtained. CONCLUSIONS: DNAm age of breast cancer tissue, which associated with menopausal status and pathological features, was a strong independent predictor of the prognosis. It was suggested that the prognosis of breast cancer was related to intrinsic biological changes and specific molecular targets for treatment of breast cancer may be implicit.

The development of breast cancer metastasis is accompanied by dynamic transcriptome changes and dramatic alterations in nuclear and chromatin structure. The basis of these changes is incompletely understood. The DNA methylome of primary breast cancers contribute to transcriptomic heterogeneity and different metastatic behavior. Therefore we sought to characterize methylome remodeling during regional metastasis. We profiled the DNA methylome and transcriptome of 44 matched primary breast tumors and regional metastases. Striking subtype-specific patterns of metastasis-associated methylome remodeling were observed, which reflected the molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers. These divergent changes occurred primarily in CpG island (CGI)-poor areas. Regions of methylome reorganization shared by the subtypes were also observed, and we were able to identify a metastasis-specific methylation signature that was present across the breast cancer subclasses. These alterations also occurred outside of CGIs and promoters, including sequences flanking CGIs and intergenic sequences. Integrated analysis of methylation and gene expression identified genes whose expression correlated with metastasis-specific methylation. Together, these findings significantly enhance our understanding of the epigenetic reorganization that occurs during regional breast cancer metastasis across the major breast cancer subtypes and reveal the nature of methylome remodeling during this process.. The development of breast cancer metastasis is accompanied by dynamic transcriptome changes and dramatic alterations in nuclear and chromatin structure. The basis of these changes is incompletely understood. The DNA methylome of primary breast cancers contribute to transcriptomic heterogeneity and different metastatic behavior. Therefore we sought to characterize methylome remodeling during regional metastasis. We profiled the DNA methylome and transcriptome of 44 matched primary breast tumors and regional metastases. Striking subtype-specific patterns of metastasis-associated methylome remodeling were observed, which reflected the molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers. These divergent changes occurred primarily in CpG island (CGI)-poor areas. Regions of methylome reorganization shared by the subtypes were also observed, and we were able to identify a metastasis-specific methylation signature that was present across the breast cancer subclasses. These alterations also occurred outside of CGIs and promoters, including sequences flanking CGIs and intergenic sequences. Integrated analysis of methylation and gene expression identified genes whose expression correlated with metastasis-specific methylation. Together, these findings significantly enhance our understanding of the epigenetic reorganization that occurs during regional breast cancer metastasis across the major breast cancer subtypes and reveal the nature of methylome remodeling during this process.

Aberrant DNA methylation of CpG islands, CpG island shores and first exons is known to play a key role in the altered gene expression patterns in all human cancers. To date, a systematic study on the effect of DNA methylation on gene expression using high resolution data has not been reported. In this study, we conducted an integrated analysis of MethylCap-sequencing data and Affymetrix gene expression microarray data for 30 breast cancer cell lines representing different breast tumor phenotypes. As well-developed methods for the integrated analysis do not currently exist, we created a series of four different analysis methods. On the computational side, our goal is to develop methylome data analysis protocols for the integrated analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression data on the genome scale. On the cancer biology side, we present comprehensive genome-wide methylome analysis results for differentially methylated regions and their potential effect on gene expression in 30 breast cancer cell lines representing three molecular phenotypes, luminal, basal A and basal B. Our integrated analysis demonstrates that methylation status of different genomic regions may play a key role in establishing transcriptional patterns in molecular subtypes of human breast cancer.. Aberrant DNA methylation of CpG islands, CpG island shores and first exons is known to play a key role in the altered gene expression patterns in all human cancers. To date, a systematic study on the effect of DNA methylation on gene expression using high resolution data has not been reported. In this study, we conducted an integrated analysis of MethylCap-sequencing data and Affymetrix gene expression microarray data for 30 breast cancer cell lines representing different breast tumor phenotypes. As well-developed methods for the integrated analysis do not currently exist, we created a series of four different analysis methods. On the computational side, our goal is to develop methylome data analysis protocols for the integrated analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression data on the genome scale. On the cancer biology side, we present comprehensive genome-wide methylome analysis results for differentially methylated regions and their potential effect on gene expression in 30 breast cancer cell lines representing three molecular phenotypes, luminal, basal A and basal B. Our integrated analysis demonstrates that methylation status of different genomic regions may play a key role in establishing transcriptional patterns in molecular subtypes of human breast cancer.

In breast and colon adenocarcinomas methylation patterns at CCGG sites of several loci located on the short arm of chromosome 11 were determined by Southern blot analysis. Results obtained indicate that all tumor samples (20/20) exhibit DNA methylation changes when compared to their normal counterparts. In colon tumors, gamma-globin gene is usually hypomethylated (9/10), whereas Ha-ras gene, which is located in the same region, retains an unmodified DNA methylation pattern. Hypomethylation of parathyroid hormone (5/10) and catalase genes (4/10) are also frequently detected in colon tumor specimens. For the catalase gene the region around exon 2 is the only one which is affected by these changes. In breast adenocarcinoma, modifications of the methylation patterns are less frequently observed. However, hypomethylation of the gamma-globin gene is a very common event in these tumors (8/10), and it is also detected (2/2) in lobular carcinoma in situ which is an early step in breast tumorigenesis. In addition, hypermethylation of a CpG island is also observed at the locus 17p13.3 in both colon (5/5) and breast (4/9) adenocarcinomas. In the tumoral tissues analyzed these hypermethylations are not associated with the hypermethylation of the 5' flanking sequences which contain a limited amount of CpG. Some of these alterations seem, therefore, to be tumor and sequence specific.. In breast and colon adenocarcinomas methylation patterns at CCGG sites of several loci located on the short arm of chromosome 11 were determined by Southern blot analysis. Results obtained indicate that all tumor samples (20/20) exhibit DNA methylation changes when compared to their normal counterparts. In colon tumors, gamma-globin gene is usually hypomethylated (9/10), whereas Ha-ras gene, which is located in the same region, retains an unmodified DNA methylation pattern. Hypomethylation of parathyroid hormone (5/10) and catalase genes (4/10) are also frequently detected in colon tumor specimens. For the catalase gene the region around exon 2 is the only one which is affected by these changes. In breast adenocarcinoma, modifications of the methylation patterns are less frequently observed. However, hypomethylation of the gamma-globin gene is a very common event in these tumors (8/10), and it is also detected (2/2) in lobular carcinoma in situ which is an early step in breast tumorigenesis. In addition, hypermethylation of a CpG island is also observed at the locus 17p13.3 in both colon (5/5) and breast (4/9) adenocarcinomas. In the tumoral tissues analyzed these hypermethylations are not associated with the hypermethylation of the 5' flanking sequences which contain a limited amount of CpG. Some of these alterations seem, therefore, to be tumor and sequence specific.

BRCA1 mRNA is reduced in sporadic breast cancer cells despite the lack of mutations. Because a CpG island is found at the 5' end of the BRCA1 gene, we hypothesized that the decreased BRCA1 mRNA in sporadic breast cancer was associated with aberrant cytosine methylation of the CpG island. We examined BRCA1 mRNA expression in normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs), peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and six sporadic breast cancer cell lines using RT-PCR. The normal breast cells expressed high levels of BRCA1 mRNA. The sporadic breast cancer cell lines and PBLs expressed lower levels of BRCA1 mRNA ranging from a 3-16-fold decrease compared to the normal breast cells. We identified a 600 bp region of the BRCA1 CpG island that possessed strong promoter activity (approximately 40-fold above control), and determined the cytosine methylation patterns of the 30 CpG sites within this region by sodium bisulfite genomic sequencing. The HMECs, PBLs and five of the sporadic breast cancer cell lines were largely unmethylated. However, one sporadic breast cancer cell line, UACC3199, was > or = 60% methylated at all 30 CpG sites (18 sites were 100% methylated) and was associated with an eightfold decrease in BRCA1 mRNA compared to normal breast cells. These findings suggest that aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 CpG island promoter may be one mechanism of BRCA1 repression in sporadic breast cancer.. BRCA1 mRNA is reduced in sporadic breast cancer cells despite the lack of mutations. Because a CpG island is found at the 5' end of the BRCA1 gene, we hypothesized that the decreased BRCA1 mRNA in sporadic breast cancer was associated with aberrant cytosine methylation of the CpG island. We examined BRCA1 mRNA expression in normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs), peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and six sporadic breast cancer cell lines using RT-PCR. The normal breast cells expressed high levels of BRCA1 mRNA. The sporadic breast cancer cell lines and PBLs expressed lower levels of BRCA1 mRNA ranging from a 3-16-fold decrease compared to the normal breast cells. We identified a 600 bp region of the BRCA1 CpG island that possessed strong promoter activity (approximately 40-fold above control), and determined the cytosine methylation patterns of the 30 CpG sites within this region by sodium bisulfite genomic sequencing. The HMECs, PBLs and five of the sporadic breast cancer cell lines were largely unmethylated. However, one sporadic breast cancer cell line, UACC3199, was > or = 60% methylated at all 30 CpG sites (18 sites were 100% methylated) and was associated with an eightfold decrease in BRCA1 mRNA compared to normal breast cells. These findings suggest that aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 CpG island promoter may be one mechanism of BRCA1 repression in sporadic breast cancer.

Functional inactivation of BRCA1 is an important mechanism involved in breast cancer pathogenesis. Mutation is often responsible for BRCA1 inactivation in familial breast cancer, but is not responsible for the decreased levels of BRCA1 seen in a subset of sporadic breast cancer patients. To determine if aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is associated with decreased BRCA1 gene expression in human breast cancer, high resolution bisulfite sequence analysis was used to analyze the cytosine methylation status of the BRCA1 promoter in 21 axillary node negative breast cancer patients with known levels of BRCA1 expression. Aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in three of 21 patient specimens. These three specimens also expressed the lowest levels of BRCA1. Results from this analysis show that aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is directly correlated with decreased levels of BRCA1 expression in human breast cancer, and suggest that epigenetic silencing may be one mechanism of transcriptional inactivation of BRCA1 in sporadic mammary carcinogenesis.. Functional inactivation of BRCA1 is an important mechanism involved in breast cancer pathogenesis. Mutation is often responsible for BRCA1 inactivation in familial breast cancer, but is not responsible for the decreased levels of BRCA1 seen in a subset of sporadic breast cancer patients. To determine if aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is associated with decreased BRCA1 gene expression in human breast cancer, high resolution bisulfite sequence analysis was used to analyze the cytosine methylation status of the BRCA1 promoter in 21 axillary node negative breast cancer patients with known levels of BRCA1 expression. Aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 promoter was detected in three of 21 patient specimens. These three specimens also expressed the lowest levels of BRCA1. Results from this analysis show that aberrant cytosine methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is directly correlated with decreased levels of BRCA1 expression in human breast cancer, and suggest that epigenetic silencing may be one mechanism of transcriptional inactivation of BRCA1 in sporadic mammary carcinogenesis.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with 1.7 million new cases each year. As early diagnosis and prognosis are crucial factors in cancer treatment, we investigated potential DNA methylation biomarkers of the tumour suppressor family Ras-association domain family (RASSF). Promoter hypermethylation of tumour suppressors leads to their inactivation and thereby promotes cancer development and progression. In this study we analysed the tumour suppressors RASSF1A and RASSF10. Our study shows that RASSF10 is expressed in normal breast but inactivated by methylation in breast cancer. We observed a significant inactivating promoter methylation of RASSF10 in primary breast tumours. RASSF10 is inactivated in 63% of primary breast cancer samples but only 4% of normal control breast tissue is methylated (p < 0.005). RASSF1A also shows high promoter methylation levels in breast cancer of 56% vs. 8% of normal tissue (p < 0.005). Interestingly more than 80% of breast cancer samples harboured a hypermethylation of RASSF10 and/or RASSF1A promoter. Matching samples exhibited a strong tumour specific promoter methylation of RASSF10 in comparison to the normal control breast tissue. Demethylation treatment of breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and T47D reversed RASSF10 promoter hypermethylation and re-established RASSF10 expression. In addition, we could show the growth inhibitory potential of RASSF10 in breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and T47D upon exogenous expression of RASSF10 by colony formation. We could further show, that RASSF10 induced apoptotic changes in MCF7 and T47D cells, which was verified by a significant increase in the apoptotic sub G1 fraction by 50% using flow cytometry for MCF7 cells. In summary, our study shows the breast tumour specific inactivation of RASSF10 and RASSF1A due to DNA methylation of their CpG island promoters. Furthermore RASSF10 was characterised by the ability to block growth of breast cancer cell lines by apoptosis induction.. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with 1.7 million new cases each year. As early diagnosis and prognosis are crucial factors in cancer treatment, we investigated potential DNA methylation biomarkers of the tumour suppressor family Ras-association domain family (RASSF). Promoter hypermethylation of tumour suppressors leads to their inactivation and thereby promotes cancer development and progression. In this study we analysed the tumour suppressors RASSF1A and RASSF10. Our study shows that RASSF10 is expressed in normal breast but inactivated by methylation in breast cancer. We observed a significant inactivating promoter methylation of RASSF10 in primary breast tumours. RASSF10 is inactivated in 63% of primary breast cancer samples but only 4% of normal control breast tissue is methylated (p < 0.005). RASSF1A also shows high promoter methylation levels in breast cancer of 56% vs. 8% of normal tissue (p < 0.005). Interestingly more than 80% of breast cancer samples harboured a hypermethylation of RASSF10 and/or RASSF1A promoter. Matching samples exhibited a strong tumour specific promoter methylation of RASSF10 in comparison to the normal control breast tissue. Demethylation treatment of breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and T47D reversed RASSF10 promoter hypermethylation and re-established RASSF10 expression. In addition, we could show the growth inhibitory potential of RASSF10 in breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and T47D upon exogenous expression of RASSF10 by colony formation. We could further show, that RASSF10 induced apoptotic changes in MCF7 and T47D cells, which was verified by a significant increase in the apoptotic sub G1 fraction by 50% using flow cytometry for MCF7 cells. In summary, our study shows the breast tumour specific inactivation of RASSF10 and RASSF1A due to DNA methylation of their CpG island promoters. Furthermore RASSF10 was characterised by the ability to block growth of breast cancer cell lines by apoptosis induction.

Cystatin M (CST6) is a candidate breast cancer tumor suppressor that is expressed in normal and premalignant breast epithelium, but not in metastatic breast cancer cell lines. CST6 is subject to epigenetic silencing in MCF-7 breast cancer cells related to methylation of the CpG island that encompasses the CST6 proximal promoter region and exon 1. In the current study, CST6 CpG island methylation and expression status was examined in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. Seven of 12 (58%) cell lines lack detectable expression of CST6 and treatment of these cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in a significant increase in CST6 expression, suggesting that the loss of expression may be related to methylation-dependent epigenetic silencing. Bisulfite sequencing of CST6 in a subset of breast cancer cell lines revealed CpG island hypermethylation in CST6-negative cells, and an absence of CpG island methylation in cells that express CST6. The extent of regional methylation was strongly associated with the lack of expression of CST6 among these cell lines. In particular, hypermethylation of the proximal promoter was significantly associated with CST6 gene silencing, and methylation of a number of individual CpGs was found to be statistically correlated with extinction of gene expression. These results establish a strong link between CST6 promoter hypermethylation and loss of CST6 expression in breast cancer cell lines, and suggest that methylation-dependent epigenetic silencing of CST6 may represent an important mechanism for loss of CST6 during breast carcinogenesis in vivo.. Cystatin M (CST6) is a candidate breast cancer tumor suppressor that is expressed in normal and premalignant breast epithelium, but not in metastatic breast cancer cell lines. CST6 is subject to epigenetic silencing in MCF-7 breast cancer cells related to methylation of the CpG island that encompasses the CST6 proximal promoter region and exon 1. In the current study, CST6 CpG island methylation and expression status was examined in a panel of breast cancer cell lines. Seven of 12 (58%) cell lines lack detectable expression of CST6 and treatment of these cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in a significant increase in CST6 expression, suggesting that the loss of expression may be related to methylation-dependent epigenetic silencing. Bisulfite sequencing of CST6 in a subset of breast cancer cell lines revealed CpG island hypermethylation in CST6-negative cells, and an absence of CpG island methylation in cells that express CST6. The extent of regional methylation was strongly associated with the lack of expression of CST6 among these cell lines. In particular, hypermethylation of the proximal promoter was significantly associated with CST6 gene silencing, and methylation of a number of individual CpGs was found to be statistically correlated with extinction of gene expression. These results establish a strong link between CST6 promoter hypermethylation and loss of CST6 expression in breast cancer cell lines, and suggest that methylation-dependent epigenetic silencing of CST6 may represent an important mechanism for loss of CST6 during breast carcinogenesis in vivo.

To identify epigenetically-regulated genes in breast cancer, MCF-7 cells were exposed to 250 nM 5-aza or 5-aza + 50 nM TSA for three weeks followed by a five week recovery period after treatment withdrawal and gene expression patterns were examined by microarray analysis. We identified 20 genes that are associated with a > or = 2-fold increase in expression in response to the demethylating treatment but returned to control levels after treatment withdrawal. RT-PCR verified that the genes identified were expressed at low or undetectable levels in control MCF-7 cells, but increased expression in treated cells. Most of these putative epigentically-regulated genes in MCF-7 cells do not contain CpG islands. In fact, these genes could be classified based upon their promoter CpG features, including genes with: (1) typical CpG features (CpG islands), (2) intermediate CpG features (weak CpG islands), and (3) atypical CpG features (no CpG islands). Prototype genes from each class (including CpG-deficient genes) were shown to be methylation-sensitive (subject to CpG methylation and responsive to demethylating agents), suggesting that not all gene targets of DNA methylation in breast cancer will contain a CpG island. Based upon the results of the current study and observations from the literature, we propose expansion of the current model for methylation-dependent regulation of gene expression to include genes lacking typical CpG islands. The expanded model we propose recognizes that all promoter CpG dinucleotides represent legitimate targets for DNA methylation and that the methylation of specific CpG dinucleotides in critical domains of regulatory regions can result in gene silencing.. To identify epigenetically-regulated genes in breast cancer, MCF-7 cells were exposed to 250 nM 5-aza or 5-aza + 50 nM TSA for three weeks followed by a five week recovery period after treatment withdrawal and gene expression patterns were examined by microarray analysis. We identified 20 genes that are associated with a > or = 2-fold increase in expression in response to the demethylating treatment but returned to control levels after treatment withdrawal. RT-PCR verified that the genes identified were expressed at low or undetectable levels in control MCF-7 cells, but increased expression in treated cells. Most of these putative epigentically-regulated genes in MCF-7 cells do not contain CpG islands. In fact, these genes could be classified based upon their promoter CpG features, including genes with: (1) typical CpG features (CpG islands), (2) intermediate CpG features (weak CpG islands), and (3) atypical CpG features (no CpG islands). Prototype genes from each class (including CpG-deficient genes) were shown to be methylation-sensitive (subject to CpG methylation and responsive to demethylating agents), suggesting that not all gene targets of DNA methylation in breast cancer will contain a CpG island. Based upon the results of the current study and observations from the literature, we propose expansion of the current model for methylation-dependent regulation of gene expression to include genes lacking typical CpG islands. The expanded model we propose recognizes that all promoter CpG dinucleotides represent legitimate targets for DNA methylation and that the methylation of specific CpG dinucleotides in critical domains of regulatory regions can result in gene silencing.

CST6 is a breast tumor suppressor gene that is expressed in normal breast epithelium, but is epigenetically silenced as a consequence of promoter hypermethylation in metastatic breast cancer cell lines. In the current study, we investigated the expression and methylation status of CST6 in primary breast tumors and lymph node metastases. 25/45 (56%) primary tumors and 17/20 (85%) lymph node metastases expressed significantly lower levels of cystatin M compared to normal breast tissue. Bisulfite sequencing demonstrated CST6 promoter hypermethylation in 11/23 (48%) neoplastic lesions analyzed, including 3/11 (27%) primary tumors and 8/12 (67%) lymph node metastases. In most cases (12/23, 52%), the expression of cystatin M directly reflected CST6 promoter methylation status. In remaining lesions (8/23, 35%) loss of cystatin M was not associated with CST6 promoter hypermethylation, indicating that other mechanisms can account for loss of CST6 expression. These results show that methylation-dependent silencing of CST6 occurs in a subset of primary breast cancers, but more frequently in metastatic lesions, possibly reflecting progression-related genomic events. To examine this possibility, primary breast tumors and matched lymph node metastases were analyzed. In 2/3 (67%) patients, primary tumors were positive for cystatin M and negative for CST6 promoter methylation, and matched metastatic lesions lacked cystatin M expression and CST6 was hypermethylated. This observation suggests that progression-related epigenetic alterations in CST6 gene expression can accompany metastatic spread from a primary tumor site. Overall, the results of the current investigation suggest that methylation-dependent epigenetic silencing of CST6 represents an important mechanism for loss of CST6 during breast tumorigenesis and/or progression to metastasis.. CST6 is a breast tumor suppressor gene that is expressed in normal breast epithelium, but is epigenetically silenced as a consequence of promoter hypermethylation in metastatic breast cancer cell lines. In the current study, we investigated the expression and methylation status of CST6 in primary breast tumors and lymph node metastases. 25/45 (56%) primary tumors and 17/20 (85%) lymph node metastases expressed significantly lower levels of cystatin M compared to normal breast tissue. Bisulfite sequencing demonstrated CST6 promoter hypermethylation in 11/23 (48%) neoplastic lesions analyzed, including 3/11 (27%) primary tumors and 8/12 (67%) lymph node metastases. In most cases (12/23, 52%), the expression of cystatin M directly reflected CST6 promoter methylation status. In remaining lesions (8/23, 35%) loss of cystatin M was not associated with CST6 promoter hypermethylation, indicating that other mechanisms can account for loss of CST6 expression. These results show that methylation-dependent silencing of CST6 occurs in a subset of primary breast cancers, but more frequently in metastatic lesions, possibly reflecting progression-related genomic events. To examine this possibility, primary breast tumors and matched lymph node metastases were analyzed. In 2/3 (67%) patients, primary tumors were positive for cystatin M and negative for CST6 promoter methylation, and matched metastatic lesions lacked cystatin M expression and CST6 was hypermethylated. This observation suggests that progression-related epigenetic alterations in CST6 gene expression can accompany metastatic spread from a primary tumor site. Overall, the results of the current investigation suggest that methylation-dependent epigenetic silencing of CST6 represents an important mechanism for loss of CST6 during breast tumorigenesis and/or progression to metastasis.

Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease. Due to its rarity, MBC research and clinical approach are mostly based upon data derived from female breast cancer (FBC). Increasing evidence indicate that on molecular level MBC may be an heterogeneous disease different from FBC. In order to investigate whether epigenetic signatures could define molecular subgroups of MBCs, we performed promoter methylation analysis of genes involved in signal transduction and hormone signalling in BRCA1/2 mutation-positive and -negative MBCs. We examined 69 MBCs, paired blood samples, and 15 normal tissues for promoter methylation of hTERT, ESR1, RASSF1, AR, MYC and WNT1 genes. MBCs showed higher gene promoter methylation levels compared to paired blood and normal breast samples. Significantly higher RASSF1 methylation levels were observed in association with BRCA1/2 mutations, HER2 expression and high tumor grade. Significantly higher AR methylation levels were observed in BRCA1/2 wild-type cases and higher WNT1 methylation levels in PR negative cases. Overall, our results indicate that alterations in gene methylation profiles are common in MBC and that methylation pattern of tumor-associated genes may allow for the identification of MBC molecular subgroups, that could have implications in clinical management of MBC patients.. Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease. Due to its rarity, MBC research and clinical approach are mostly based upon data derived from female breast cancer (FBC). Increasing evidence indicate that on molecular level MBC may be an heterogeneous disease different from FBC. In order to investigate whether epigenetic signatures could define molecular subgroups of MBCs, we performed promoter methylation analysis of genes involved in signal transduction and hormone signalling in BRCA1/2 mutation-positive and -negative MBCs. We examined 69 MBCs, paired blood samples, and 15 normal tissues for promoter methylation of hTERT, ESR1, RASSF1, AR, MYC and WNT1 genes. MBCs showed higher gene promoter methylation levels compared to paired blood and normal breast samples. Significantly higher RASSF1 methylation levels were observed in association with BRCA1/2 mutations, HER2 expression and high tumor grade. Significantly higher AR methylation levels were observed in BRCA1/2 wild-type cases and higher WNT1 methylation levels in PR negative cases. Overall, our results indicate that alterations in gene methylation profiles are common in MBC and that methylation pattern of tumor-associated genes may allow for the identification of MBC molecular subgroups, that could have implications in clinical management of MBC patients.

BACKGROUND: Genomic DNA methylation, mutations and allelic deletions explain the inactivation of genes involved in cell proliferation and cell cycle control mechanisms. AIM: To analyze the methylation pattern of important genes related to different carcinogenic mechanisms in patients with breast cancer and the relationship with its biological behavior. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Seventy fresh-frozen breast cancer samples were selected. The methylation specific PCR (MSP) test was used to analyze promoter methylation status for genes CDKN2A (p16), hMLH1, APC, CDH1 (Cadherin E) and FHIT. RESULTS: We found methylation in at least one of the genes studied in 88% of cases and in 3 or more genes in 40.5% of cases. The frequencies of promoter hypermethylation of CDKN2A, hMLH1, APC, CDH1 and FHT were 41.4%, 11.4%, 52.9%, 70% and 42.9%, respectively. We found a relationship between CDKN2A methylatlon and better survival (p=0.002). CDH1 methylation and poor histological differentiation (p=0.007), hMLH1 methylation and non-Mapuche ethnicity (p=-0.03), APC methylation and larger tumor size (p<0.05), FHIT methylatton and lack of estrogen rectptor IHC expression (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The high frequency of promoter methylation in patients with breast cancer confirms its role in breast carcinogenesis. The finding of alterations in the methylation pattern of genes studied and its association with prognostic factors is a helpful tool in the search of new criteria for clinical and therapeutic decision making.. BACKGROUND: Genomic DNA methylation, mutations and allelic deletions explain the inactivation of genes involved in cell proliferation and cell cycle control mechanisms. AIM: To analyze the methylation pattern of important genes related to different carcinogenic mechanisms in patients with breast cancer and the relationship with its biological behavior. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Seventy fresh-frozen breast cancer samples were selected. The methylation specific PCR (MSP) test was used to analyze promoter methylation status for genes CDKN2A (p16), hMLH1, APC, CDH1 (Cadherin E) and FHIT. RESULTS: We found methylation in at least one of the genes studied in 88% of cases and in 3 or more genes in 40.5% of cases. The frequencies of promoter hypermethylation of CDKN2A, hMLH1, APC, CDH1 and FHT were 41.4%, 11.4%, 52.9%, 70% and 42.9%, respectively. We found a relationship between CDKN2A methylatlon and better survival (p=0.002). CDH1 methylation and poor histological differentiation (p=0.007), hMLH1 methylation and non-Mapuche ethnicity (p=-0.03), APC methylation and larger tumor size (p<0.05), FHIT methylatton and lack of estrogen rectptor IHC expression (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The high frequency of promoter methylation in patients with breast cancer confirms its role in breast carcinogenesis. The finding of alterations in the methylation pattern of genes studied and its association with prognostic factors is a helpful tool in the search of new criteria for clinical and therapeutic decision making.

Background: Previous studies have suggested a causative role for agonists of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the etiology of breast cancer 1, early-onset (BRCA-1)-silenced breast tumors, for which prospects for treatment remain poor. Objectives: We investigated the regulation of BRCA1 by the soy isoflavone genistein (GEN) in human estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-positive Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) and ERalpha-negative sporadic University of Arizona Cell Culture-3199 (UACC-3199) breast cancer cells, respectively, with inducible and constitutively active AhR. Methods: In MCF-7 cells, we analyzed the dose- and time-dependent effects of GEN and (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) control, selected as prototype dietary DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors, on BRCA-1 expression after AhR activation with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and in TCDD-washout experiments. We compared the effects of GEN and EGCG on BRCA1 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) methylation and cell proliferation. Controls for DNA methylation and proliferation were changes in expression of DNMT-1, cyclin D1, and p53, respectively. In UACC-3199 cells, we compared the effects of GEN and alpha-naphthoflavone (alphaNF; 7,8-benzoflavone), a synthetic flavone and AhR antagonist, on BRCA1 expression and CpG methylation, cyclin D1, and cell growth. Finally, we examined the effects of GEN and alphaNF on BRCA1, AhR-inducible cytochrome P450 (CYP)-1A1 (CYP1A1) and CYP1B1, and AhR mRNA expression. Results: In MCF-7 cells, GEN exerted dose- and time-dependent preventative effects against TCDD-dependent downregulation of BRCA-1. After TCDD washout, GEN rescued BRCA-1 protein expression while reducing DNMT-1 and cyclin D1. GEN and EGCG reduced BRCA1 CpG methylation and cell proliferation associated with increased p53. In UACC-3199 cells, GEN reduced BRCA1 and estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1) CpG methylation, cyclin D1, and cell growth while inducing BRCA-1 and CYP1A1. Conclusions: Results suggest preventative effects for GEN and EGCG against BRCA1 CpG methylation and downregulation in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells with activated AhR. GEN and flavone antagonists of AhR may be useful for reactivation of BRCA1 and ERalpha via CpG demethylation in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells harboring constitutively active AhR.. Background: Previous studies have suggested a causative role for agonists of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in the etiology of breast cancer 1, early-onset (BRCA-1)-silenced breast tumors, for which prospects for treatment remain poor. Objectives: We investigated the regulation of BRCA1 by the soy isoflavone genistein (GEN) in human estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-positive Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) and ERalpha-negative sporadic University of Arizona Cell Culture-3199 (UACC-3199) breast cancer cells, respectively, with inducible and constitutively active AhR. Methods: In MCF-7 cells, we analyzed the dose- and time-dependent effects of GEN and (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) control, selected as prototype dietary DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors, on BRCA-1 expression after AhR activation with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and in TCDD-washout experiments. We compared the effects of GEN and EGCG on BRCA1 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) methylation and cell proliferation. Controls for DNA methylation and proliferation were changes in expression of DNMT-1, cyclin D1, and p53, respectively. In UACC-3199 cells, we compared the effects of GEN and alpha-naphthoflavone (alphaNF; 7,8-benzoflavone), a synthetic flavone and AhR antagonist, on BRCA1 expression and CpG methylation, cyclin D1, and cell growth. Finally, we examined the effects of GEN and alphaNF on BRCA1, AhR-inducible cytochrome P450 (CYP)-1A1 (CYP1A1) and CYP1B1, and AhR mRNA expression. Results: In MCF-7 cells, GEN exerted dose- and time-dependent preventative effects against TCDD-dependent downregulation of BRCA-1. After TCDD washout, GEN rescued BRCA-1 protein expression while reducing DNMT-1 and cyclin D1. GEN and EGCG reduced BRCA1 CpG methylation and cell proliferation associated with increased p53. In UACC-3199 cells, GEN reduced BRCA1 and estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1) CpG methylation, cyclin D1, and cell growth while inducing BRCA-1 and CYP1A1. Conclusions: Results suggest preventative effects for GEN and EGCG against BRCA1 CpG methylation and downregulation in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells with activated AhR. GEN and flavone antagonists of AhR may be useful for reactivation of BRCA1 and ERalpha via CpG demethylation in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells harboring constitutively active AhR.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80 breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade. The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1, OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and (ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. Our results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing and maintaining the different phenotypes.. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80 breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade. The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1, OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and (ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. Our results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing and maintaining the different phenotypes.

The CpG island spanning the transcription start of the glutathione S-transferase P1 becomes methylated in a variety of human cancers including breast cancer. To study the effect of sequence variation on hypermethylation of the GSTP1 promoter, we analyzed the genetic and epigenetic variability in 90 tumors from patients with locally advanced breast cancer. High-resolution quantitative analysis revealed large variability in the DNA methylation levels. Lack of methylation was more often observed in the basal and normal-like estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors, and methylated GSTP1 was associated with better overall survival (P = 0.00063). Studies of the genetic variation identified 14 different haplotypes. The distribution of methylation levels of tumors homozygous for the most frequent haplotype was significantly different from other haplotype combinations (P = 0.011), the difference being more pronounced in ER-positive (P = 0.005) and progesterone receptor-positive (P = 0.008) tumors. Regression modeling identified the ER status and haplotype as the main determinants of DNA methylation variability. We identified a putative c-Myb response element (MRE) that was present in one of two minimal promoter haplotypes. In vitro analysis showed that c-Myb binds to the MRE, but binding was weakened by the two polymorphisms. Transient cotransfections in luminal-type and basal-like breast cancer cell lines confirmed cell-specific differential binding of c-Myb to the polymorphic sites, leading to a change in the expression from the GSTP1 promoter in vivo. GSTP1 expression was moderately but significantly (P = 0.01) reduced after siRNA-mediated knockdown of c-Myb. Our results indicate that haplotype structure of a promoter is important for the extent of DNA methylation.. The CpG island spanning the transcription start of the glutathione S-transferase P1 becomes methylated in a variety of human cancers including breast cancer. To study the effect of sequence variation on hypermethylation of the GSTP1 promoter, we analyzed the genetic and epigenetic variability in 90 tumors from patients with locally advanced breast cancer. High-resolution quantitative analysis revealed large variability in the DNA methylation levels. Lack of methylation was more often observed in the basal and normal-like estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors, and methylated GSTP1 was associated with better overall survival (P = 0.00063). Studies of the genetic variation identified 14 different haplotypes. The distribution of methylation levels of tumors homozygous for the most frequent haplotype was significantly different from other haplotype combinations (P = 0.011), the difference being more pronounced in ER-positive (P = 0.005) and progesterone receptor-positive (P = 0.008) tumors. Regression modeling identified the ER status and haplotype as the main determinants of DNA methylation variability. We identified a putative c-Myb response element (MRE) that was present in one of two minimal promoter haplotypes. In vitro analysis showed that c-Myb binds to the MRE, but binding was weakened by the two polymorphisms. Transient cotransfections in luminal-type and basal-like breast cancer cell lines confirmed cell-specific differential binding of c-Myb to the polymorphic sites, leading to a change in the expression from the GSTP1 promoter in vivo. GSTP1 expression was moderately but significantly (P = 0.01) reduced after siRNA-mediated knockdown of c-Myb. Our results indicate that haplotype structure of a promoter is important for the extent of DNA methylation.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells undergo massive alterations to their DNA methylation patterns that result in aberrant gene expression and malignant phenotypes. However, the mechanisms that underlie methylome changes are not well understood nor is the genomic distribution of DNA methylation changes well characterized. RESULTS: Here, we performed methylated DNA immunoprecipitation combined with high-throughput sequencing (MeDIP-seq) to obtain whole-genome DNA methylation profiles for eight human breast cancer cell (BCC) lines and for normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). The MeDIP-seq analysis generated non-biased DNA methylation maps by covering almost the entire genome with sufficient depth and resolution. The most prominent feature of the BCC lines compared to HMEC was a massively reduced methylation level particularly in CpG-poor regions. While hypomethylation did not appear to be associated with particular genomic features, hypermethylation preferentially occurred at CpG-rich gene-related regions independently of the distance from transcription start sites. We also investigated methylome alterations during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in MCF7 cells. EMT induction was associated with specific alterations to the methylation patterns of gene-related CpG-rich regions, although overall methylation levels were not significantly altered. Moreover, approximately 40% of the epithelial cell-specific methylation patterns in gene-related regions were altered to those typical of mesenchymal cells, suggesting a cell-type specific regulation of DNA methylation. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the most comprehensive analysis to date of the methylome of human mammary cell lines and has produced novel insights into the mechanisms of methylome alteration during tumorigenesis and the interdependence between DNA methylome alterations and morphological changes.. BACKGROUND: Cancer cells undergo massive alterations to their DNA methylation patterns that result in aberrant gene expression and malignant phenotypes. However, the mechanisms that underlie methylome changes are not well understood nor is the genomic distribution of DNA methylation changes well characterized. RESULTS: Here, we performed methylated DNA immunoprecipitation combined with high-throughput sequencing (MeDIP-seq) to obtain whole-genome DNA methylation profiles for eight human breast cancer cell (BCC) lines and for normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). The MeDIP-seq analysis generated non-biased DNA methylation maps by covering almost the entire genome with sufficient depth and resolution. The most prominent feature of the BCC lines compared to HMEC was a massively reduced methylation level particularly in CpG-poor regions. While hypomethylation did not appear to be associated with particular genomic features, hypermethylation preferentially occurred at CpG-rich gene-related regions independently of the distance from transcription start sites. We also investigated methylome alterations during epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in MCF7 cells. EMT induction was associated with specific alterations to the methylation patterns of gene-related CpG-rich regions, although overall methylation levels were not significantly altered. Moreover, approximately 40% of the epithelial cell-specific methylation patterns in gene-related regions were altered to those typical of mesenchymal cells, suggesting a cell-type specific regulation of DNA methylation. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the most comprehensive analysis to date of the methylome of human mammary cell lines and has produced novel insights into the mechanisms of methylome alteration during tumorigenesis and the interdependence between DNA methylome alterations and morphological changes.

The applicability of cyclin D2 and RARbeta2 methylated markers for the development of a breast tumor screening assay was evaluated. Overall, 76 volunteers (mean age, 50.4 years), including clinically healthy women and women with breast lesions, were enrolled in a blind study of methylation of the cyclin D2 and RARbeta2 genes. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was conducted using total circulating DNA (cirDNA) from the blood, including the cell-free and cell-surface-bound DNA fractions. Only 1 of the 25 women of the clinically healthy group displayed methylated cyclin D2 gene (4%). However, 42% of the patients with primary diagnosis of breast fibroadenoma showed an aberrant methylation of at least one of the tested genes in the cirDNA. The number of patients with breast lesions (mastopathy) not diagnosed as fibroadenoma that displayed methylation was lower (33%). A long-term follow-up study based on a quantitative evaluation of cyclin D2 and RARbeta2 methylation in cirDNA will provide the data on applicability of these markers for breast tumor predictive diagnostics.. The applicability of cyclin D2 and RARbeta2 methylated markers for the development of a breast tumor screening assay was evaluated. Overall, 76 volunteers (mean age, 50.4 years), including clinically healthy women and women with breast lesions, were enrolled in a blind study of methylation of the cyclin D2 and RARbeta2 genes. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was conducted using total circulating DNA (cirDNA) from the blood, including the cell-free and cell-surface-bound DNA fractions. Only 1 of the 25 women of the clinically healthy group displayed methylated cyclin D2 gene (4%). However, 42% of the patients with primary diagnosis of breast fibroadenoma showed an aberrant methylation of at least one of the tested genes in the cirDNA. The number of patients with breast lesions (mastopathy) not diagnosed as fibroadenoma that displayed methylation was lower (33%). A long-term follow-up study based on a quantitative evaluation of cyclin D2 and RARbeta2 methylation in cirDNA will provide the data on applicability of these markers for breast tumor predictive diagnostics.

With no sharp cure, breast cancer still be the major and the most serious life-threatening disease worldwide. Colorectal is the third most commonly occurring cancer in men and the second most commonly occurring cancer in women. In the present investigation, colon cancer cells (CaCo-2) and breast cancer cells (MCF-7) were treated with elevated doses of metformin (MET) for 48h. Cell count was assessed using trypan blue test, and the cytotoxicity was evaluated using MTT assay. Methylation-specific PCR was performed on the bisulfite-treated DNA against two tumor suppressor genes; RASSF1A and RB. Results indicated that: in breast cancer, the cell count was decreased significantly (P>0.005) after being treated with 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100 mM of MET. The elevated concentration had increased reduction percentages on the MCF-7 cells, as 5 mM and 100 mM have yielded 35% and 93.3% reduction in cell viability, respectively. Colon cancer cells have responded to the doses of MET differently, as for the 5 mM and the 100 mM, it gave 88% and 60% reduction in cells viability, respectively. Cytotoxicity assay revealed that 5 mM and 100 mM of MET caused breast cancer cells to loss 61.53% and 85.16% of its viability, respectively, whereas colon cancer cells have responded to the 5 mM and 100 mM of MET by reducing the cells viability with 96.91% and 96.24%, respectively. No RB promoter methylation was detected in colon cells, while RASSF1A was partially methylated. In the MCF-7 breast cancer cells, both RASSF1A and RB were partially methylated.. With no sharp cure, breast cancer still be the major and the most serious life-threatening disease worldwide. Colorectal is the third most commonly occurring cancer in men and the second most commonly occurring cancer in women. In the present investigation, colon cancer cells (CaCo-2) and breast cancer cells (MCF-7) were treated with elevated doses of metformin (MET) for 48h. Cell count was assessed using trypan blue test, and the cytotoxicity was evaluated using MTT assay. Methylation-specific PCR was performed on the bisulfite-treated DNA against two tumor suppressor genes; RASSF1A and RB. Results indicated that: in breast cancer, the cell count was decreased significantly (P>0.005) after being treated with 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100 mM of MET. The elevated concentration had increased reduction percentages on the MCF-7 cells, as 5 mM and 100 mM have yielded 35% and 93.3% reduction in cell viability, respectively. Colon cancer cells have responded to the doses of MET differently, as for the 5 mM and the 100 mM, it gave 88% and 60% reduction in cells viability, respectively. Cytotoxicity assay revealed that 5 mM and 100 mM of MET caused breast cancer cells to loss 61.53% and 85.16% of its viability, respectively, whereas colon cancer cells have responded to the 5 mM and 100 mM of MET by reducing the cells viability with 96.91% and 96.24%, respectively. No RB promoter methylation was detected in colon cells, while RASSF1A was partially methylated. In the MCF-7 breast cancer cells, both RASSF1A and RB were partially methylated.

Exposures to environmental carcinogens and unhealthy lifestyle choices increase the incidence of breast cancer. One such compound, benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), leads to covalent DNA modifications and the deregulation of gene expression. To date, these mechanisms of BaP-induced carcinogenesis are poorly understood, particularly in the case of breast cancer. We tested the effects of BaP exposure on cellular growth dynamics and DNA methylation in four breast cancer cell lines since disruptions in DNA methylation lead to deregulated gene expression and the loss of genomic integrity. We observed robust time- and concentration-dependent loss of proliferation, S phase and G2M accumulation and apoptosis in p53 positive MCF-7 and T47-D cells. We observed minimal responses in p53 negative HCC-1086 and MDA MB 231 cells. Furthermore, BaP increased p53 levels in both p53 positive cell lines, as well as p21 levels in MCF-7 cells, an effect that was prevented by the p53-specific inhibitor pifithrin-alpha. No changes in global levels of DNA methylation levels induced by BaP were detected by the methyl acceptor assay (MAA) in any cell line, however, methylation profiling by AIMS (amplification of intermethylated sites) analysis showed dynamic, sequence-specific hypo- and hypermethylation events in all cell lines. We also identified BaP-induced hypomethylation events at a number of genomic repeats. Our data confirm the p53-specific disruption of the cell cycle as well as the disruption of DNA methylation as a consequence of BaP treatment, thus reinforcing the link between environmental exposures, DNA methylation and breast cancer.. Exposures to environmental carcinogens and unhealthy lifestyle choices increase the incidence of breast cancer. One such compound, benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), leads to covalent DNA modifications and the deregulation of gene expression. To date, these mechanisms of BaP-induced carcinogenesis are poorly understood, particularly in the case of breast cancer. We tested the effects of BaP exposure on cellular growth dynamics and DNA methylation in four breast cancer cell lines since disruptions in DNA methylation lead to deregulated gene expression and the loss of genomic integrity. We observed robust time- and concentration-dependent loss of proliferation, S phase and G2M accumulation and apoptosis in p53 positive MCF-7 and T47-D cells. We observed minimal responses in p53 negative HCC-1086 and MDA MB 231 cells. Furthermore, BaP increased p53 levels in both p53 positive cell lines, as well as p21 levels in MCF-7 cells, an effect that was prevented by the p53-specific inhibitor pifithrin-alpha. No changes in global levels of DNA methylation levels induced by BaP were detected by the methyl acceptor assay (MAA) in any cell line, however, methylation profiling by AIMS (amplification of intermethylated sites) analysis showed dynamic, sequence-specific hypo- and hypermethylation events in all cell lines. We also identified BaP-induced hypomethylation events at a number of genomic repeats. Our data confirm the p53-specific disruption of the cell cycle as well as the disruption of DNA methylation as a consequence of BaP treatment, thus reinforcing the link between environmental exposures, DNA methylation and breast cancer.

EGF-containing fibulin-like extracellular matrix protein 1 (EFEMP1) was recently described as an antagonist of angiogenesis. Motivated by a strong dependence of tumor growth and metastasis on angiogenesis, we investigated the role of EFEMP1 in human breast cancer. We applied RNA microarray expression analysis and quantitative real-time PCR (QRT) in a total of 45 sporadic breast cancer tissues and found EFEMP1 down-regulation in 59% and 61% of the analyzed tissues, respectively. This down-regulation was confirmed on protein level. Immunohistochemistry in 211 breast cancer tissues resulted in reduced or even abolished EFEMP1 expression in 57-62.5% of the tumors. Bisulphite genomic sequencing in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast cancer tissues revealed promoter methylation as the major cause of this down-regulation. Furthermore, analysis of 203 clinically well characterized primary breast cancers displayed a significant correlation of reduced EFEMP1 protein expression with poor disease-free (p = 0.037) and overall survival (p = 0.032), particularly in those node-positive patients who received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy, but not in those treated by either cyclophosphamide-methotrexate-5-fluorouracil (CMF) or Tamoxifen. In summary, the presented data demonstrate for the first time the reduced EFEMP1 expression on RNA and protein level in a substantial number of sporadic breast carcinomas and its correlation with epigenetic alterations. Furthermore, these data point towards a possible predictive impact of EFEMP1 expression in primary breast cancer.. EGF-containing fibulin-like extracellular matrix protein 1 (EFEMP1) was recently described as an antagonist of angiogenesis. Motivated by a strong dependence of tumor growth and metastasis on angiogenesis, we investigated the role of EFEMP1 in human breast cancer. We applied RNA microarray expression analysis and quantitative real-time PCR (QRT) in a total of 45 sporadic breast cancer tissues and found EFEMP1 down-regulation in 59% and 61% of the analyzed tissues, respectively. This down-regulation was confirmed on protein level. Immunohistochemistry in 211 breast cancer tissues resulted in reduced or even abolished EFEMP1 expression in 57-62.5% of the tumors. Bisulphite genomic sequencing in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast cancer tissues revealed promoter methylation as the major cause of this down-regulation. Furthermore, analysis of 203 clinically well characterized primary breast cancers displayed a significant correlation of reduced EFEMP1 protein expression with poor disease-free (p = 0.037) and overall survival (p = 0.032), particularly in those node-positive patients who received adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy, but not in those treated by either cyclophosphamide-methotrexate-5-fluorouracil (CMF) or Tamoxifen. In summary, the presented data demonstrate for the first time the reduced EFEMP1 expression on RNA and protein level in a substantial number of sporadic breast carcinomas and its correlation with epigenetic alterations. Furthermore, these data point towards a possible predictive impact of EFEMP1 expression in primary breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BrC) is the most frequent neoplasm in women. New biomarkers, including aberrant DNA methylation, may improve BrC management. Herein, we evaluated the detection and prognostic performance of seven genes' promoter methylation (APC, BRCA1, CCND2, FOXA1, PSAT1, RASSF1A and SCGB3A1). METHODS: Methylation levels were assessed in primary BrC tissues by quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) and in circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) by multiplex QMSP from two independent cohorts of patients (Cohort #1, n = 137; and Cohort #2, n = 44). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed, and log-rank test and Cox regression were performed to assess the prognostic value of genes' methylation levels. RESULTS: The gene-panel APC, FOXA1, RASSF1A, SCGB3A1 discriminated normal from cancerous tissue with high accuracy (95.55%). In multivariable analysis, high PSAT1-methylation levels [>percentile 75 (P75)] associated with longer disease-free survival, whereas higher FOXA1-methylation levels (>P75) associated with shorter disease-specific survival. The best performing panel in ccfDNA (APC, FOXA1 and RASSF1A) disclosed a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy over 70%. CONCLUSIONS: This approach enables BrC accurate diagnosis and prognostic stratification in tissue samples, and allows for early detection in liquid biopsies, thus suggesting a putative value for patient management.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BrC) is the most frequent neoplasm in women. New biomarkers, including aberrant DNA methylation, may improve BrC management. Herein, we evaluated the detection and prognostic performance of seven genes' promoter methylation (APC, BRCA1, CCND2, FOXA1, PSAT1, RASSF1A and SCGB3A1). METHODS: Methylation levels were assessed in primary BrC tissues by quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) and in circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) by multiplex QMSP from two independent cohorts of patients (Cohort #1, n = 137; and Cohort #2, n = 44). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were constructed, and log-rank test and Cox regression were performed to assess the prognostic value of genes' methylation levels. RESULTS: The gene-panel APC, FOXA1, RASSF1A, SCGB3A1 discriminated normal from cancerous tissue with high accuracy (95.55%). In multivariable analysis, high PSAT1-methylation levels [>percentile 75 (P75)] associated with longer disease-free survival, whereas higher FOXA1-methylation levels (>P75) associated with shorter disease-specific survival. The best performing panel in ccfDNA (APC, FOXA1 and RASSF1A) disclosed a sensitivity, specificity and accuracy over 70%. CONCLUSIONS: This approach enables BrC accurate diagnosis and prognostic stratification in tissue samples, and allows for early detection in liquid biopsies, thus suggesting a putative value for patient management.

. 
Shift work has been suggested to be associated with breast cancer risk, and circadian disruption in shift workers is hypothesized as one of the mechanisms of increased cancer risk. There is, however, insufficient molecular evidence supporting this hypothesis. Using the quantitative methodology of pyrosequencing, epigenetic changes in 5-methyl cytosine (5mC) in five circadian genes CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1, PER1 and PER2 in female nurses working night shift work (278 breast cancer cases, 280 controls) were analyzed. In breast cancer cases, a medium exposure to night work was associated with increased methylation levels of the CLOCK (p=0.050), BMAL1 (p=0.001) and CRY1 (p=0.040) genes, compared with controls. Within the cases, analysis of the effects of shift work on the methylation patterns showed that methylation of CRY1 was lower in those who had worked night shift and had a high exposure (p=0.006) compared with cases that had worked only days. For cases with a medium exposure to night work, an increase in BMAL1 (p=0.003) and PER1 (p=0.035) methylation was observed compared with day working (unexposed) cases. The methylation levels of the five core circadian genes were also analyzed in relation to the estrogen and progesterone receptors status of the tumors in the cases, and no correlations were observed. Furthermore, nineteen polymorphisms in the five circadian genes were assessed for their effects on the methylation levels of the respective genes, but no associations were found. In summary, our data suggest that epigenetic regulation of CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1 and PER1 may contribute to breast cancer in shift workers.. Shift work has been suggested to be associated with breast cancer risk, and circadian disruption in shift workers is hypothesized as one of the mechanisms of increased cancer risk. There is, however, insufficient molecular evidence supporting this hypothesis. Using the quantitative methodology of pyrosequencing, epigenetic changes in 5-methyl cytosine (5mC) in five circadian genes CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1, PER1 and PER2 in female nurses working night shift work (278 breast cancer cases, 280 controls) were analyzed. In breast cancer cases, a medium exposure to night work was associated with increased methylation levels of the CLOCK (p=0.050), BMAL1 (p=0.001) and CRY1 (p=0.040) genes, compared with controls. Within the cases, analysis of the effects of shift work on the methylation patterns showed that methylation of CRY1 was lower in those who had worked night shift and had a high exposure (p=0.006) compared with cases that had worked only days. For cases with a medium exposure to night work, an increase in BMAL1 (p=0.003) and PER1 (p=0.035) methylation was observed compared with day working (unexposed) cases. The methylation levels of the five core circadian genes were also analyzed in relation to the estrogen and progesterone receptors status of the tumors in the cases, and no correlations were observed. Furthermore, nineteen polymorphisms in the five circadian genes were assessed for their effects on the methylation levels of the respective genes, but no associations were found. In summary, our data suggest that epigenetic regulation of CLOCK, BMAL1, CRY1 and PER1 may contribute to breast cancer in shift workers.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients usually present worse clinical outcomes due to their high heterogeneity. The purpose of our study is to investigate the prognostic role of AR and BRCA1 expression in sporadic TNBC patients, and effect of AR blockade and PARP1 inhibitor for TNBC patients who characterized by positive-AR expression and BRCA1 inactivation or dysfunction. In our present study, we found that AR is expressed in 43.6% and 34.0% of TNBC tissues, when 1% or 10% staining was used as the threshold for AR positivity, respectively. When 1% staining was used as the threshold, AR expression indicates a poor disease-free survival (DFS) of TNBC patients. TNBC patients with negative BRCA1 show a poor DFS, and BRCA1 suppression is associated with the methylation status of its promoter. Interestingly, BRCA1-/AR + TNBC patients have shorter DFS than other TNBC patients regardless of the threshold for AR positivity. AR antagonists MDV3100 enhances the PARP1 inhibitor Olaparib-mediated decrease of cell viability in AR-positive/BRCA1-inactivated cells in vitro and in vivo. Our results suggested that combination of AR blockade and PARP1 inhibitor may be a potential strategy for sporadic TNBC patients who characterized by positive-AR expression and BRCA1 inactivation or dysfunction.. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients usually present worse clinical outcomes due to their high heterogeneity. The purpose of our study is to investigate the prognostic role of AR and BRCA1 expression in sporadic TNBC patients, and effect of AR blockade and PARP1 inhibitor for TNBC patients who characterized by positive-AR expression and BRCA1 inactivation or dysfunction. In our present study, we found that AR is expressed in 43.6% and 34.0% of TNBC tissues, when 1% or 10% staining was used as the threshold for AR positivity, respectively. When 1% staining was used as the threshold, AR expression indicates a poor disease-free survival (DFS) of TNBC patients. TNBC patients with negative BRCA1 show a poor DFS, and BRCA1 suppression is associated with the methylation status of its promoter. Interestingly, BRCA1-/AR + TNBC patients have shorter DFS than other TNBC patients regardless of the threshold for AR positivity. AR antagonists MDV3100 enhances the PARP1 inhibitor Olaparib-mediated decrease of cell viability in AR-positive/BRCA1-inactivated cells in vitro and in vivo. Our results suggested that combination of AR blockade and PARP1 inhibitor may be a potential strategy for sporadic TNBC patients who characterized by positive-AR expression and BRCA1 inactivation or dysfunction.

Background: High expression of immune checkpoints in tumor microenvironment plays significant roles in inhibiting anti-tumor immunity, which is associated with poor prognosis and cancer progression. Major epigenetic modifications in both DNA and histone could be involved in upregulation of immune checkpoints in cancer. Methods: Expressions of different immune checkpoint genes and PD-L1 were assessed using qRT-PCR, and the underlying epigenetic modifications including CpG methylation and repressive histone abundance were determined using bisulfite sequencing, and histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) and histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) chromatin immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP), respectively. Results: We first assessed the expression level of six immune checkpoints/ligands and found that PD-1, CTLA-4, TIM-3, and LAG-3 were significantly upregulated in breast tumor tissues (TT), compared with breast normal tissues (NT). We investigated the epigenetic modifications beyond this upregulation in immune checkpoint genes. Interestingly, we found that CpG islands in the promoter regions of PD-1, CTLA-4, and TIM-3 were significantly hypomethylated in tumor compared with normal tissues. Additionally, CpG islands of PD-L1 promoter were completely demethylated (100%), LAG-3 were highly hypomethylated (80-90%), and TIGIT were poorly hypomethylated (20-30%), in both NT and TT. These demethylation findings are in accordance with the relative expression data that, out of all these genes, PD-L1 was highly expressed and completely demethylated and TIGIT was poorly expressed and hypermethylated in both NT and TT. Moreover, bindings of H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 were found to be reduced in the promoter loci of PD-1, CTLA-4, TIM-3, and LAG-3 in tumor tissues. Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that both DNA and histone modifications are involved in upregulation of PD-1, CTLA-4, TIM-3, and LAG-3 in breast tumor tissue and these epigenetic modifications could be useful as diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets in breast cancer.. Background: High expression of immune checkpoints in tumor microenvironment plays significant roles in inhibiting anti-tumor immunity, which is associated with poor prognosis and cancer progression. Major epigenetic modifications in both DNA and histone could be involved in upregulation of immune checkpoints in cancer. Methods: Expressions of different immune checkpoint genes and PD-L1 were assessed using qRT-PCR, and the underlying epigenetic modifications including CpG methylation and repressive histone abundance were determined using bisulfite sequencing, and histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) and histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) chromatin immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP), respectively. Results: We first assessed the expression level of six immune checkpoints/ligands and found that PD-1, CTLA-4, TIM-3, and LAG-3 were significantly upregulated in breast tumor tissues (TT), compared with breast normal tissues (NT). We investigated the epigenetic modifications beyond this upregulation in immune checkpoint genes. Interestingly, we found that CpG islands in the promoter regions of PD-1, CTLA-4, and TIM-3 were significantly hypomethylated in tumor compared with normal tissues. Additionally, CpG islands of PD-L1 promoter were completely demethylated (100%), LAG-3 were highly hypomethylated (80-90%), and TIGIT were poorly hypomethylated (20-30%), in both NT and TT. These demethylation findings are in accordance with the relative expression data that, out of all these genes, PD-L1 was highly expressed and completely demethylated and TIGIT was poorly expressed and hypermethylated in both NT and TT. Moreover, bindings of H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 were found to be reduced in the promoter loci of PD-1, CTLA-4, TIM-3, and LAG-3 in tumor tissues. Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that both DNA and histone modifications are involved in upregulation of PD-1, CTLA-4, TIM-3, and LAG-3 in breast tumor tissue and these epigenetic modifications could be useful as diagnostic/prognostic biomarkers and/or therapeutic targets in breast cancer.

PURPOSE: Down-regulation of Laminin-5 (LN5)-encoding genes (LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2) has been reported in various human cancers. However, the mechanism of inactivation was not clearly understood until recently. In this study, we investigated the loss of expression of three LN5-encoding genes in breast cancer cell lines and elucidated the mechanism of silencing of the genes in breast cancer cell lines and tumors. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined the expression of the three LN5-encoding genes by reverse transcription-PCR in breast cancer cell lines (n = 20). To elucidate the mechanism of silencing, we treated expression negative cell lines (n = 5) with a demethylating agent and examined restoration of expression by reverse transcription-PCR. By using methylation-specific primers designed by us, we validated the methylation status of the promoter regions in breast cancer cell lines using methylation-specific PCR. We additionally studied the methylation patterns in primary breast tumors (n = 74) and correlated the data with clinical parameters. RESULTS: We observed varied losses of expression (10-55%) of LN5-encoding genes in breast cancer cell lines. Expression of one or more genes was lost in 65% of breast cancer cell lines. Treatment of expression negative cell lines with demethylating agent restored expression in all cases. Methylation frequencies of LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2 genes in 20 breast cancer cell lines were 40, 5, and 15%, respectively. The concordances between loss of expression and methylation in 20 breast cancer cell lines for the three genes (85-95%) were statistically significant. Nonmalignant breast tissues (n = 30) had very low frequencies of methylation (0-7%). In 74 breast tumors, methylation frequencies LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2 were 44, 4, and 20%, respectively. The differences in methylation frequencies between cell lines and tumors were not statistically significant for all of the three genes. The methylation frequencies of LAMA3 and mean chain methylation index in cell lines and tumors were significantly different from methylation frequencies in nonmalignant tissues, and they were significantly higher in high stage and large size tumors as compared with low-stage and small size tumors. LAMA3 promoter methylation frequency in breast tumors was associated with increased tumor stage (P < 0.001) and tumor size (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate epigenetic inactivation of LN5-encoding genes in breast cancers and association of LAMA3 promoter methylation with increased tumor stage and tumor size. Our findings are of biological interest and potentially of clinical importance.. PURPOSE: Down-regulation of Laminin-5 (LN5)-encoding genes (LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2) has been reported in various human cancers. However, the mechanism of inactivation was not clearly understood until recently. In this study, we investigated the loss of expression of three LN5-encoding genes in breast cancer cell lines and elucidated the mechanism of silencing of the genes in breast cancer cell lines and tumors. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined the expression of the three LN5-encoding genes by reverse transcription-PCR in breast cancer cell lines (n = 20). To elucidate the mechanism of silencing, we treated expression negative cell lines (n = 5) with a demethylating agent and examined restoration of expression by reverse transcription-PCR. By using methylation-specific primers designed by us, we validated the methylation status of the promoter regions in breast cancer cell lines using methylation-specific PCR. We additionally studied the methylation patterns in primary breast tumors (n = 74) and correlated the data with clinical parameters. RESULTS: We observed varied losses of expression (10-55%) of LN5-encoding genes in breast cancer cell lines. Expression of one or more genes was lost in 65% of breast cancer cell lines. Treatment of expression negative cell lines with demethylating agent restored expression in all cases. Methylation frequencies of LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2 genes in 20 breast cancer cell lines were 40, 5, and 15%, respectively. The concordances between loss of expression and methylation in 20 breast cancer cell lines for the three genes (85-95%) were statistically significant. Nonmalignant breast tissues (n = 30) had very low frequencies of methylation (0-7%). In 74 breast tumors, methylation frequencies LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2 were 44, 4, and 20%, respectively. The differences in methylation frequencies between cell lines and tumors were not statistically significant for all of the three genes. The methylation frequencies of LAMA3 and mean chain methylation index in cell lines and tumors were significantly different from methylation frequencies in nonmalignant tissues, and they were significantly higher in high stage and large size tumors as compared with low-stage and small size tumors. LAMA3 promoter methylation frequency in breast tumors was associated with increased tumor stage (P < 0.001) and tumor size (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate epigenetic inactivation of LN5-encoding genes in breast cancers and association of LAMA3 promoter methylation with increased tumor stage and tumor size. Our findings are of biological interest and potentially of clinical importance.

Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are an important group of isoenzymes that play an essential role in the detoxification of carcinogens. Polymorphism at exon 5 of the GST pi family decreases the catalytic activity and affects the detoxification ability of the enzyme, GSTP1. GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation and loss of expression are frequently observed in various types of carcinoma. We hypothesized that somatic epigenetic modification in homozygous mutants increases the degree to which breast cancer risk is affected by lifestyle factors and dietary habits. The present study used tumor biopsies and blood samples from 215 breast cancer patients and 215 blood samples from healthy donors. GSTP1 polymorphism was studied using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism, methylation using methylation-specific PCR and loss of expression using immunohistochemistry and western blotting. No significant increase was observed in the breast cancer risk of individuals with the mutant (Val) allele [odds ratio (OR), 1.48; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.97-2.26 for heterozygotes; OR, 1.42; 95% CI, 0.86-2.42 homozygous mutants]. GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation was detected in one-third of tumor biopsies (74/215) and was found to be associated with a loss of expression. Genotype and tumor methylation associations were not observed. Estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptor-positive tumors had a higher methylation frequency. GSTP1 polymorphism was not associated with increased promoter hypermethylation. The results suggest that GSTP1 methylation is a major event in breast carcinogenesis and may act as a tumor-specific biomarker.. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are an important group of isoenzymes that play an essential role in the detoxification of carcinogens. Polymorphism at exon 5 of the GST pi family decreases the catalytic activity and affects the detoxification ability of the enzyme, GSTP1. GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation and loss of expression are frequently observed in various types of carcinoma. We hypothesized that somatic epigenetic modification in homozygous mutants increases the degree to which breast cancer risk is affected by lifestyle factors and dietary habits. The present study used tumor biopsies and blood samples from 215 breast cancer patients and 215 blood samples from healthy donors. GSTP1 polymorphism was studied using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism, methylation using methylation-specific PCR and loss of expression using immunohistochemistry and western blotting. No significant increase was observed in the breast cancer risk of individuals with the mutant (Val) allele [odds ratio (OR), 1.48; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.97-2.26 for heterozygotes; OR, 1.42; 95% CI, 0.86-2.42 homozygous mutants]. GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation was detected in one-third of tumor biopsies (74/215) and was found to be associated with a loss of expression. Genotype and tumor methylation associations were not observed. Estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptor-positive tumors had a higher methylation frequency. GSTP1 polymorphism was not associated with increased promoter hypermethylation. The results suggest that GSTP1 methylation is a major event in breast carcinogenesis and may act as a tumor-specific biomarker.

Background: Breast cancer patients at high risk for recurrence are treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy, but not all patients do equally benefit from such a regimen. To further improve therapy decision-making, biomarkers predicting outcome are of high unmet medical need. Methods: The percent DNA methylation ratio (PMR) of the promoter gene coding for the Paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) was determined by a validated methylation-specific real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. The multicenter study was conducted in routinely collected archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue from 205 lymph node-positive breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Results: The cut-off for the PITX2 methylation status (PMR = 12) was confirmed in a randomly selected cohort (n = 60) and validated (n = 145) prospectively with disease-free survival (DFS) at the 10-year follow-up. DFS was significantly different between the PMR </= 12 versus the PMR > 12 group with a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.74 (p < 0.001) in the validation cohort and also for the patient subgroup treated additionally with endocrine therapy (HR 2.47; p = 0.001). Conclusions: Early-stage lymph node-positive breast cancer patients with low PITX2 methylation do benefit from adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Patients with a high PITX2 DNA methylation ratio, approximately 30%, show poor outcome and should thus be considered for alternative chemotherapy regimens.. Background: Breast cancer patients at high risk for recurrence are treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy, but not all patients do equally benefit from such a regimen. To further improve therapy decision-making, biomarkers predicting outcome are of high unmet medical need. Methods: The percent DNA methylation ratio (PMR) of the promoter gene coding for the Paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) was determined by a validated methylation-specific real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. The multicenter study was conducted in routinely collected archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue from 205 lymph node-positive breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Results: The cut-off for the PITX2 methylation status (PMR = 12) was confirmed in a randomly selected cohort (n = 60) and validated (n = 145) prospectively with disease-free survival (DFS) at the 10-year follow-up. DFS was significantly different between the PMR </= 12 versus the PMR > 12 group with a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.74 (p < 0.001) in the validation cohort and also for the patient subgroup treated additionally with endocrine therapy (HR 2.47; p = 0.001). Conclusions: Early-stage lymph node-positive breast cancer patients with low PITX2 methylation do benefit from adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Patients with a high PITX2 DNA methylation ratio, approximately 30%, show poor outcome and should thus be considered for alternative chemotherapy regimens.

Significant evidence has accumulated that DNA-methylation of the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene can serve as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in breast cancer. PITX2 DNA-methylation data have been obtained so far from microarray and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based research tests. The availability of an analytically validated in vitro methylation-specific real-time PCR assay format (therascreen PITX2 RGQ PCR assay) intended for the determination of the percent methylation ratio (PMR) in the (PITX2) promoter 2 prompted us to investigate whether the clinical performance of these different assay systems generate comparable clinical outcome data. Mathematically converted microarray data of a previous breast cancer study (n = 204) into PMR values leads to a PITX2 cut-off value at PMR 14.73. Recalculation of the data to experimentally equivalent PMRs with the PCR PITX2 assay leads to a cut-off value at PMR 12 with the highest statistical significance. This cut-off predicts outcome of high-risk breast cancer patients to adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy (n = 204; Hazard Ratio 2.48; p < 0.001) comparable to microarray generated results (n = 204; Hazard ratio 2.32; p < 0.0001). The therascreen PITX2 RGQ PCR assay is an analytically validated test with high reliability and robustness and predicts outcome of high-risk breast cancer patients to anthracycline-based chemotherapy.. Significant evidence has accumulated that DNA-methylation of the paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene can serve as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in breast cancer. PITX2 DNA-methylation data have been obtained so far from microarray and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based research tests. The availability of an analytically validated in vitro methylation-specific real-time PCR assay format (therascreen PITX2 RGQ PCR assay) intended for the determination of the percent methylation ratio (PMR) in the (PITX2) promoter 2 prompted us to investigate whether the clinical performance of these different assay systems generate comparable clinical outcome data. Mathematically converted microarray data of a previous breast cancer study (n = 204) into PMR values leads to a PITX2 cut-off value at PMR 14.73. Recalculation of the data to experimentally equivalent PMRs with the PCR PITX2 assay leads to a cut-off value at PMR 12 with the highest statistical significance. This cut-off predicts outcome of high-risk breast cancer patients to adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy (n = 204; Hazard Ratio 2.48; p < 0.001) comparable to microarray generated results (n = 204; Hazard ratio 2.32; p < 0.0001). The therascreen PITX2 RGQ PCR assay is an analytically validated test with high reliability and robustness and predicts outcome of high-risk breast cancer patients to anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

Light-at-night (LAN) is a worldwide problem co-distributed with breast cancer prevalence. We hypothesized that exposure to LAN is coincided with a decreased melatonin (MLT) secretion level, followed by epigenetic modifications and resulted in higher breast cancer tumors growth-rate. Accordingly, we studied the effect of LAN exposure and exogenous MLT on breast cancer tumors growth-rate. 4T1 cells were inoculated into BALB/c short day-acclimated mice, resulting in tumors growth. Growth rates were followed under various light exposures and global DNA methylations were measured. Results demonstrated the positive effect of LAN on tumors growth-rate, reversed by MLT through global DNA methylation.. Light-at-night (LAN) is a worldwide problem co-distributed with breast cancer prevalence. We hypothesized that exposure to LAN is coincided with a decreased melatonin (MLT) secretion level, followed by epigenetic modifications and resulted in higher breast cancer tumors growth-rate. Accordingly, we studied the effect of LAN exposure and exogenous MLT on breast cancer tumors growth-rate. 4T1 cells were inoculated into BALB/c short day-acclimated mice, resulting in tumors growth. Growth rates were followed under various light exposures and global DNA methylations were measured. Results demonstrated the positive effect of LAN on tumors growth-rate, reversed by MLT through global DNA methylation.

DNA methylation can mimic the effects of both germline and somatic mutations for cancer predisposition genes such as BRCA1 and p16INK4a. Constitutional DNA methylation of the BRCA1 promoter has been well described and is associated with an increased risk of early-onset breast cancers that have BRCA1-mutation associated histological features. The role of methylation in the context of other breast cancer predisposition genes has been less well studied and often with conflicting or ambiguous outcomes. We examined the role of methylation in known breast cancer susceptibility genes in breast cancer predisposition and tumor development. We applied the Infinium HumanMethylation450 Beadchip (HM450K) array to blood and tumor-derived DNA from 43 women diagnosed with breast cancer before the age of 40 years and measured the methylation profiles across promoter regions of BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, CDH1, TP53, FANCM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Prior genetic testing had demonstrated that these women did not carry a germline mutation in BRCA1, ATM, CHEK2, PALB2, TP53, BRCA2, CDH1 or FANCM. In addition to the BRCA1 promoter region, this work identified regions with variable methylation at multiple breast cancer susceptibility genes including PALB2 and MLH1. Methylation at the region of MLH1 in these breast cancers was not associated with microsatellite instability. This work informs future studies of the role of methylation in breast cancer susceptibility gene silencing.. DNA methylation can mimic the effects of both germline and somatic mutations for cancer predisposition genes such as BRCA1 and p16INK4a. Constitutional DNA methylation of the BRCA1 promoter has been well described and is associated with an increased risk of early-onset breast cancers that have BRCA1-mutation associated histological features. The role of methylation in the context of other breast cancer predisposition genes has been less well studied and often with conflicting or ambiguous outcomes. We examined the role of methylation in known breast cancer susceptibility genes in breast cancer predisposition and tumor development. We applied the Infinium HumanMethylation450 Beadchip (HM450K) array to blood and tumor-derived DNA from 43 women diagnosed with breast cancer before the age of 40 years and measured the methylation profiles across promoter regions of BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, CDH1, TP53, FANCM, CHEK2, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Prior genetic testing had demonstrated that these women did not carry a germline mutation in BRCA1, ATM, CHEK2, PALB2, TP53, BRCA2, CDH1 or FANCM. In addition to the BRCA1 promoter region, this work identified regions with variable methylation at multiple breast cancer susceptibility genes including PALB2 and MLH1. Methylation at the region of MLH1 in these breast cancers was not associated with microsatellite instability. This work informs future studies of the role of methylation in breast cancer susceptibility gene silencing.

Breast cancers arising in women carrying a germline mutation in BRCA1 are typically high-grade, early-onset and have distinct morphological features (BRCA1-like). However, the majority of early-onset breast cancers of this morphological type are not associated with germline BRCA1 mutations or constitutional BRCA1 promoter methylation. We aimed to assess DNA methylation across the genome for associations with the "BRCA1-like" morphology. Genome-wide methylation in blood-derived DNA was measured using the Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChip assay for women under the age of 40years participating in the Australian Breast Cancer Family Study (ABCFS) diagnosed with: i) BRCA1-like breast cancer (n=30); and ii) breast cancer without BRCA1-like morphological features (non BRCA1-like; n=30), and age-matched unaffected women (controls; n=30). Corresponding tumour-derived DNA from 43 of the affected women was also assessed. Methylation of blood-derived DNA was found to be elevated across 17 consecutive marks in the BRCA1 promoter region and decreased at several other genomic regions (including TWIST2 and CTBP1) for 7 women (23%) diagnosed with BRCA1-like breast cancer compared with women in the other groups. Corresponding tumour-derived DNA available from 5 of these 7 women had elevated methylation within the BRCA1 and SPHK2 promoter region and decreased methylation within the ADAP1, IGF2BP3 and SPATA13 promoter region when compared with the other breast tumours. These methylation marks could be biomarkers of risk for BRCA1-like breast cancer, and could be responsible in part for their distinctive morphological features and biology. As such, they may assist with prevention and targeted therapies for this cancer subtype.. Breast cancers arising in women carrying a germline mutation in BRCA1 are typically high-grade, early-onset and have distinct morphological features (BRCA1-like). However, the majority of early-onset breast cancers of this morphological type are not associated with germline BRCA1 mutations or constitutional BRCA1 promoter methylation. We aimed to assess DNA methylation across the genome for associations with the "BRCA1-like" morphology. Genome-wide methylation in blood-derived DNA was measured using the Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChip assay for women under the age of 40years participating in the Australian Breast Cancer Family Study (ABCFS) diagnosed with: i) BRCA1-like breast cancer (n=30); and ii) breast cancer without BRCA1-like morphological features (non BRCA1-like; n=30), and age-matched unaffected women (controls; n=30). Corresponding tumour-derived DNA from 43 of the affected women was also assessed. Methylation of blood-derived DNA was found to be elevated across 17 consecutive marks in the BRCA1 promoter region and decreased at several other genomic regions (including TWIST2 and CTBP1) for 7 women (23%) diagnosed with BRCA1-like breast cancer compared with women in the other groups. Corresponding tumour-derived DNA available from 5 of these 7 women had elevated methylation within the BRCA1 and SPHK2 promoter region and decreased methylation within the ADAP1, IGF2BP3 and SPATA13 promoter region when compared with the other breast tumours. These methylation marks could be biomarkers of risk for BRCA1-like breast cancer, and could be responsible in part for their distinctive morphological features and biology. As such, they may assist with prevention and targeted therapies for this cancer subtype.

BACKGROUND: Limited evidence suggests that female breast tissue ages faster than other parts of the body according to an epigenetic biomarker of aging known as the "epigenetic clock." However, it is unknown whether breast tissue samples from healthy women show a similar accelerated aging effect relative to other tissues, and what could drive this acceleration. The goal of this study is to validate our initial finding of advanced DNA methylation (DNAm) age in breast tissue, by directly comparing it to that of peripheral blood tissue from the same individuals, and to do a preliminary assessment of hormonal factors that could explain the difference. METHODS: We utilized n = 80 breast and 80 matching blood tissue samples collected from 40 healthy female participants of the Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank at the Indiana University Simon Cancer Center who donated these samples at two time points spaced at least a year apart. DNA methylation levels (Illumina 450K platform) were used to estimate the DNAm age. RESULTS: DNAm age was highly correlated with chronological age in both peripheral blood (r = 0.94, p < 0.0001) and breast tissues (r = 0.86, p < 0.0001). A measure of epigenetic age acceleration (age-adjusted DNAm Age) was substantially increased in breast relative to peripheral blood tissue (p = 1.6 x 10(-11)). The difference between DNAm age of breast and blood decreased with advancing chronologic age (r = -0.53, p = 4.4 x 10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: Our data clearly demonstrate that female breast tissue has a higher epigenetic age than blood collected from the same subject. We also observe that the degree of elevation in breast diminishes with advancing age. Future larger studies will be needed to examine associations between epigenetic age acceleration and cumulative hormone exposure.. BACKGROUND: Limited evidence suggests that female breast tissue ages faster than other parts of the body according to an epigenetic biomarker of aging known as the "epigenetic clock." However, it is unknown whether breast tissue samples from healthy women show a similar accelerated aging effect relative to other tissues, and what could drive this acceleration. The goal of this study is to validate our initial finding of advanced DNA methylation (DNAm) age in breast tissue, by directly comparing it to that of peripheral blood tissue from the same individuals, and to do a preliminary assessment of hormonal factors that could explain the difference. METHODS: We utilized n = 80 breast and 80 matching blood tissue samples collected from 40 healthy female participants of the Susan G. Komen Tissue Bank at the Indiana University Simon Cancer Center who donated these samples at two time points spaced at least a year apart. DNA methylation levels (Illumina 450K platform) were used to estimate the DNAm age. RESULTS: DNAm age was highly correlated with chronological age in both peripheral blood (r = 0.94, p < 0.0001) and breast tissues (r = 0.86, p < 0.0001). A measure of epigenetic age acceleration (age-adjusted DNAm Age) was substantially increased in breast relative to peripheral blood tissue (p = 1.6 x 10(-11)). The difference between DNAm age of breast and blood decreased with advancing chronologic age (r = -0.53, p = 4.4 x 10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: Our data clearly demonstrate that female breast tissue has a higher epigenetic age than blood collected from the same subject. We also observe that the degree of elevation in breast diminishes with advancing age. Future larger studies will be needed to examine associations between epigenetic age acceleration and cumulative hormone exposure.

A significant percentage (~30%) of estrogen receptoralpha (ERalpha)positive tumors become refractory to endocrine therapies; however, the mechanisms responsible for this resistance remain largely unknown. Chronic exposure to arsenic through foods and contaminated water has been linked to an increased incidence of several tumors and longterm health complications. Preclinical and population studies have indicated that arsenic exposure may interfere with endocrine regulation and increase the risk of breast tumorigenesis. In this study, we examined the effects of sodium arsenite (NaAsIII) exposure in ERalphapositive breast cancer cells in vitro and in mammary tumor xenografts. The results revealed that acute (within 4 days) and longterm (10 days to 7 weeks) in vitro exposure to environmentally relevant doses reduced breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) and ERalpha expression associated with the gain of cyclin D1 (CCND1) and folate receptor 1 (FOLR1), and the loss of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) expression. Furthermore, longterm exposure to NaAsIII induced the proliferation and compromised the response of MCF7 cells to tamoxifen (TAM). The in vitro exposure to NaAsIII induced BRCA1 CpG methylation associated with the increased recruitment of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and the loss of RNA polymerase II (PolII) at the BRCA1 gene. Xenografts of NaAsIIIpreconditioned MCF7 cells (MCF7NaAsIII) into the mammary fat pads of nude mice produced a larger tumor volume compared to tumors from control MCF7 cells and were more refractory to TAM in association with the reduced expression of BRCA1 and ERalpha, CpG hypermethylation of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and BRCA1, and the increased expression of FOLR1. These cumulative data support the hypothesis that exposure to AsIII may contribute to reducing the efficacy of endocrine therapy against ERalphapositive breast tumors by hampering the expression of ERalpha and BRCA1 via CpG methylation, respectively of ESR1 and BRCA1.. A significant percentage (~30%) of estrogen receptoralpha (ERalpha)positive tumors become refractory to endocrine therapies; however, the mechanisms responsible for this resistance remain largely unknown. Chronic exposure to arsenic through foods and contaminated water has been linked to an increased incidence of several tumors and longterm health complications. Preclinical and population studies have indicated that arsenic exposure may interfere with endocrine regulation and increase the risk of breast tumorigenesis. In this study, we examined the effects of sodium arsenite (NaAsIII) exposure in ERalphapositive breast cancer cells in vitro and in mammary tumor xenografts. The results revealed that acute (within 4 days) and longterm (10 days to 7 weeks) in vitro exposure to environmentally relevant doses reduced breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) and ERalpha expression associated with the gain of cyclin D1 (CCND1) and folate receptor 1 (FOLR1), and the loss of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) expression. Furthermore, longterm exposure to NaAsIII induced the proliferation and compromised the response of MCF7 cells to tamoxifen (TAM). The in vitro exposure to NaAsIII induced BRCA1 CpG methylation associated with the increased recruitment of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and the loss of RNA polymerase II (PolII) at the BRCA1 gene. Xenografts of NaAsIIIpreconditioned MCF7 cells (MCF7NaAsIII) into the mammary fat pads of nude mice produced a larger tumor volume compared to tumors from control MCF7 cells and were more refractory to TAM in association with the reduced expression of BRCA1 and ERalpha, CpG hypermethylation of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and BRCA1, and the increased expression of FOLR1. These cumulative data support the hypothesis that exposure to AsIII may contribute to reducing the efficacy of endocrine therapy against ERalphapositive breast tumors by hampering the expression of ERalpha and BRCA1 via CpG methylation, respectively of ESR1 and BRCA1.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small non-coding RNAs which targets most protein-coding transcripts (mRNA) and destroy them. Thus miRNA controls the abundance of those specific proteins and impact on developmental, physiological and pathological processes. Dysregulation of miRNA function thus may lead to various clinicopathological complications, including breast cancer. Silencing of miR-152 gene due to promoter DNA methylation alter the expression pattern of several other genes. E-cadherin (CDH1) forms the core of adherent junctions between surrounding epithelial cells, link with actin cytoskeleton and affects cell signaling. CDH1 gene is down regulated by promoter DNA methylation during cancer progression. In this investigation, we attempt to elucidate the correlation of miR-152 and CDH1 function, as it is well known that the loss of CDH1 function is one of the major reasons for cancer metastasis and aggressiveness of spreading. For the first time we have shown that loss of CDH1 expression is directly proportional to the loss of miR-152 function in breast cancer cells. mRNA and protein expression profile of DNMT1 implicate that miR-152 targets DNMT1 mRNA and inhibits its protein expression. Tracing the molecular marks on DNA and histone 3 for understanding the mechanism of gene regulation by ChIP analyses leads to a paradoxical result that shows DNA methylation adjacent to active histone marking (enrichment of H3K4me3) silence miR-152 gene. Further experiments revealed that DNMT1 plays crucial role for regulation of miR-152 gene. When DNMT1 protein function is blocked miR-152 expression prevails and destroys the mRNA of DNMT1; this molecular regulatory mechanism is creating a cyclic feedback loop, which is now focused as DNMT1/miR-152 switch for on/off of DNMT1 target genes. We discovered modulation of CDH1 gene expression by DNMT1/miR-152 switches. We have demonstrated further that DNMT1 down regulation mediated upregulation of CDH1 (hereafter, DNMT1/CDH1 loop) in presence of ectopic-excess of miR-152 prevents migration of cancer cells. Our data provides novel insights into the regulation mechanism of miRNA and mRNA/protein coding genes and enhances the amplitude of cancer epigenome.. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small non-coding RNAs which targets most protein-coding transcripts (mRNA) and destroy them. Thus miRNA controls the abundance of those specific proteins and impact on developmental, physiological and pathological processes. Dysregulation of miRNA function thus may lead to various clinicopathological complications, including breast cancer. Silencing of miR-152 gene due to promoter DNA methylation alter the expression pattern of several other genes. E-cadherin (CDH1) forms the core of adherent junctions between surrounding epithelial cells, link with actin cytoskeleton and affects cell signaling. CDH1 gene is down regulated by promoter DNA methylation during cancer progression. In this investigation, we attempt to elucidate the correlation of miR-152 and CDH1 function, as it is well known that the loss of CDH1 function is one of the major reasons for cancer metastasis and aggressiveness of spreading. For the first time we have shown that loss of CDH1 expression is directly proportional to the loss of miR-152 function in breast cancer cells. mRNA and protein expression profile of DNMT1 implicate that miR-152 targets DNMT1 mRNA and inhibits its protein expression. Tracing the molecular marks on DNA and histone 3 for understanding the mechanism of gene regulation by ChIP analyses leads to a paradoxical result that shows DNA methylation adjacent to active histone marking (enrichment of H3K4me3) silence miR-152 gene. Further experiments revealed that DNMT1 plays crucial role for regulation of miR-152 gene. When DNMT1 protein function is blocked miR-152 expression prevails and destroys the mRNA of DNMT1; this molecular regulatory mechanism is creating a cyclic feedback loop, which is now focused as DNMT1/miR-152 switch for on/off of DNMT1 target genes. We discovered modulation of CDH1 gene expression by DNMT1/miR-152 switches. We have demonstrated further that DNMT1 down regulation mediated upregulation of CDH1 (hereafter, DNMT1/CDH1 loop) in presence of ectopic-excess of miR-152 prevents migration of cancer cells. Our data provides novel insights into the regulation mechanism of miRNA and mRNA/protein coding genes and enhances the amplitude of cancer epigenome.

Aberrant DNA methylation is a key feature of breast carcinoma. We aimed to test the association between breast cancer risk and epigenome-wide methylation in DNA from peripheral blood. Nested case-control study within the prospective Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study. DNA was extracted from before-diagnosis blood samples (420 incident cases and matched controls). Methylation was measured with the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450 BeadChip array. Odds ratio (OR) for epigenome-wide methylation, quantified as the mean beta values across the CpGs, in relation to breast cancer risk were estimated using conditional logistic regression. Overall, the OR for breast cancer was 0.42 (95% CI 0.20-0.90) for the top versus bottom quartile of epigenome-wide DNA methylation and the OR for a one standard deviation increment was 0.69 (95% CI 0.50-0.95; test for linear trend, p = 0.02). Epigenome-wide DNA methylation of CpGs within functional promoters was associated with an increased risk, whereas epigenome-wide DNA methylation of genomic regions outside promoters was associated with decreased risk (test for heterogeneity, p = 0.0002). The increased risk associated with epigenome-wide DNA methylation in functional promoters did not vary by time between blood collection and diagnosis, whereas the inverse association with epigenome-wide DNA methylation outside functional promoters was strongest when the interval from blood collection to diagnosis was less than 5 years and weakest for the longest interval. Epigenome-wide methylation in DNA extracted from peripheral blood collected before diagnosis may have potential utility as markers of breast cancer risk and for early detection.. Aberrant DNA methylation is a key feature of breast carcinoma. We aimed to test the association between breast cancer risk and epigenome-wide methylation in DNA from peripheral blood. Nested case-control study within the prospective Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study. DNA was extracted from before-diagnosis blood samples (420 incident cases and matched controls). Methylation was measured with the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450 BeadChip array. Odds ratio (OR) for epigenome-wide methylation, quantified as the mean beta values across the CpGs, in relation to breast cancer risk were estimated using conditional logistic regression. Overall, the OR for breast cancer was 0.42 (95% CI 0.20-0.90) for the top versus bottom quartile of epigenome-wide DNA methylation and the OR for a one standard deviation increment was 0.69 (95% CI 0.50-0.95; test for linear trend, p = 0.02). Epigenome-wide DNA methylation of CpGs within functional promoters was associated with an increased risk, whereas epigenome-wide DNA methylation of genomic regions outside promoters was associated with decreased risk (test for heterogeneity, p = 0.0002). The increased risk associated with epigenome-wide DNA methylation in functional promoters did not vary by time between blood collection and diagnosis, whereas the inverse association with epigenome-wide DNA methylation outside functional promoters was strongest when the interval from blood collection to diagnosis was less than 5 years and weakest for the longest interval. Epigenome-wide methylation in DNA extracted from peripheral blood collected before diagnosis may have potential utility as markers of breast cancer risk and for early detection.

BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is an important epigenetic alteration that occurs in the primary stages of human tumors, including breast cancer. Identification of methylated genes and their relationship to clinical features can contribute to the prognosis and early detection of tumors. In this study, we explored the methylation status of APC and BRCA1 genes and their relationship to clinical factors in breast cancer patients. METHODS: BRCA1 and APC promoter methylation was examined by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) breast tissue from 75 patients. RESULTS: APC promoter methylation was detected in 30.67% breast cancer tissues and BRCA1 was methylated in 9.33% of breast tumors. Methylation of APC was associated with low histological grade (p = 0.006) and methylation of BRCA1 was related with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.017). CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the methylation status of APC and BRCA1 can be a predictive marker for early detection and better management of breast cancer patients.. BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is an important epigenetic alteration that occurs in the primary stages of human tumors, including breast cancer. Identification of methylated genes and their relationship to clinical features can contribute to the prognosis and early detection of tumors. In this study, we explored the methylation status of APC and BRCA1 genes and their relationship to clinical factors in breast cancer patients. METHODS: BRCA1 and APC promoter methylation was examined by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) breast tissue from 75 patients. RESULTS: APC promoter methylation was detected in 30.67% breast cancer tissues and BRCA1 was methylated in 9.33% of breast tumors. Methylation of APC was associated with low histological grade (p = 0.006) and methylation of BRCA1 was related with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.017). CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the methylation status of APC and BRCA1 can be a predictive marker for early detection and better management of breast cancer patients.

DNA methylation of promoter regions is a common molecular mechanism for inactivation of tumor suppressor genes that participates in carcinogenesis. Determining the methylation status of genes in cancer and their association with clinical features play an essential role in early diagnosis, prognosis and determine appropriate treatment for patients. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the methylation of tumor suppressor genes in patients with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). Furthermore, we evaluated the association between clinical parameters and DNA methylation as a biomarker in diagnostic IDC patients. The methylation-specific multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay was used to analyze the methylation profile of 24 genes in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples from 75 patients with IDC. Each of the patients showed a distinctive methylation profile. We observed higher methylation in the RASSF1 (48 %), CDH13 (44 %) and GSTP1 (36 %) genes. Some of the methylated genes were associated with clinical features. Methylation of GSTP1 (P=0.028) and RASSF1 (P=0.012) were related with lymph node metastasis. Methylation of GSTP1 (P=0.005) was associated with high histological grade. Moreover, concurrent methylation of GSTP1 and CDH13 was observed in IDC patients (p<0.001). Hierarchical cluster analysis based on the methylation profile revealed two main clusters of patients, the highly methylated cluster being significantly associated with high histological grade and lymph node metastasis. The results of this study indicate that the methylation status of RASSF1 and CDH13 and GSTP1 can be a prognostic marker to better management of IDC patients.. DNA methylation of promoter regions is a common molecular mechanism for inactivation of tumor suppressor genes that participates in carcinogenesis. Determining the methylation status of genes in cancer and their association with clinical features play an essential role in early diagnosis, prognosis and determine appropriate treatment for patients. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the methylation of tumor suppressor genes in patients with invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). Furthermore, we evaluated the association between clinical parameters and DNA methylation as a biomarker in diagnostic IDC patients. The methylation-specific multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) assay was used to analyze the methylation profile of 24 genes in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples from 75 patients with IDC. Each of the patients showed a distinctive methylation profile. We observed higher methylation in the RASSF1 (48 %), CDH13 (44 %) and GSTP1 (36 %) genes. Some of the methylated genes were associated with clinical features. Methylation of GSTP1 (P=0.028) and RASSF1 (P=0.012) were related with lymph node metastasis. Methylation of GSTP1 (P=0.005) was associated with high histological grade. Moreover, concurrent methylation of GSTP1 and CDH13 was observed in IDC patients (p<0.001). Hierarchical cluster analysis based on the methylation profile revealed two main clusters of patients, the highly methylated cluster being significantly associated with high histological grade and lymph node metastasis. The results of this study indicate that the methylation status of RASSF1 and CDH13 and GSTP1 can be a prognostic marker to better management of IDC patients.

Detection of breast cancer at an early stage is the key for successful treatment and improvement of outcome. However the limitations of mammography are well recognized, especially for those women with premenopausal breast cancer. Novel approaches to breast cancer screening are necessary, especially in the developing world where mammography is not feasible. In this study, we examined the promoter methylation of six genes (SFN, P16, hMLH1, HOXD13, PCDHGB7 and RASSF1a) in circulating free DNA (cfDNA) extracted from serum. We used a high-throughput DNA methylation assay (MethyLight) to examine serum from 749 cases including breast cancer patients, patients with benign breast diseases and healthy women. The six-gene methylation panel test achieved 79.6% and 82.4% sensitivity with a specificity of 72.4% and 78.1% in diagnosis of breast cancer when compared with healthy and benign disease controls, respectively. Moreover, the methylation panel positive group showed significant differences in the following independent variables: (a) involvement of family history of tumors; (b) a low proliferative index, ki-67; (c) high ratios in luminal subtypes. Additionally the panel also complemented some breast cancer cases which were neglected by mammography or ultrasound. These data suggest that epigenetic markers in serum have potential for diagnosis of breast cancer.. Detection of breast cancer at an early stage is the key for successful treatment and improvement of outcome. However the limitations of mammography are well recognized, especially for those women with premenopausal breast cancer. Novel approaches to breast cancer screening are necessary, especially in the developing world where mammography is not feasible. In this study, we examined the promoter methylation of six genes (SFN, P16, hMLH1, HOXD13, PCDHGB7 and RASSF1a) in circulating free DNA (cfDNA) extracted from serum. We used a high-throughput DNA methylation assay (MethyLight) to examine serum from 749 cases including breast cancer patients, patients with benign breast diseases and healthy women. The six-gene methylation panel test achieved 79.6% and 82.4% sensitivity with a specificity of 72.4% and 78.1% in diagnosis of breast cancer when compared with healthy and benign disease controls, respectively. Moreover, the methylation panel positive group showed significant differences in the following independent variables: (a) involvement of family history of tumors; (b) a low proliferative index, ki-67; (c) high ratios in luminal subtypes. Additionally the panel also complemented some breast cancer cases which were neglected by mammography or ultrasound. These data suggest that epigenetic markers in serum have potential for diagnosis of breast cancer.

Chromosome region 3p12-14 is an important tumour suppressor gene (TSG) locus for multiple cancers. ADAMTS9, a member of the metalloprotease large family, has been identified as a candidate 3p14.2 TSG inactivated by aberrant promoter CpG methylation in several carcinomas, but little known about its expression and function in breast cancer. In this report, ADAMTS9 expression and methylation was analysed in breast cancer cell lines and tissue samples. ADAMTS9 RNA was significantly down-regulated in breast cancer cell lines (6/8). After treating the cells with demethylation agent Aza and TSA, ADAMTS9 expression was dramatically increased. Bisulphite genomic sequencing and methylation-specific PCR detected promoter methylation, which was associated with decreased ADAMTS9 expression. Hypermethylation was also detected in 130/219 (59.4%) of primary tumours but only in 4.5% (2/44) of paired surgical margin tissues. Ectopic expression of ADAMTS9 in tumor cells induced significant growth suppression, cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase, enhanced apoptosis and reduced cell migration and invasion. Conditioned culture medium from ADAMTS9-transfected BT549 cells markedly disrupted tube formation ability of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) in Matrigel. Furthermore, ADAMTS9 inhibited AKT signaling and its downstream targets (MDM2, p53, p21, p27, E-cadherin, VIM, SNAIL, VEGFA, NFkappaB-p65 and MMP2). In addition, we demonstrated, for the first time, that ADAMTS9 inhibits AKT signaling, through suppressing its upstream activators EGFR and TGFbeta1/TbetaR(I/II) in breast cancer cells. Our results suggest that ADAMTS9 is a TSG epigenetically inactivated in breast cancer, which functions through blocking EGFR- and TGFbeta1/TbetaR(I/II)-activated AKT signaling.. Chromosome region 3p12-14 is an important tumour suppressor gene (TSG) locus for multiple cancers. ADAMTS9, a member of the metalloprotease large family, has been identified as a candidate 3p14.2 TSG inactivated by aberrant promoter CpG methylation in several carcinomas, but little known about its expression and function in breast cancer. In this report, ADAMTS9 expression and methylation was analysed in breast cancer cell lines and tissue samples. ADAMTS9 RNA was significantly down-regulated in breast cancer cell lines (6/8). After treating the cells with demethylation agent Aza and TSA, ADAMTS9 expression was dramatically increased. Bisulphite genomic sequencing and methylation-specific PCR detected promoter methylation, which was associated with decreased ADAMTS9 expression. Hypermethylation was also detected in 130/219 (59.4%) of primary tumours but only in 4.5% (2/44) of paired surgical margin tissues. Ectopic expression of ADAMTS9 in tumor cells induced significant growth suppression, cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase, enhanced apoptosis and reduced cell migration and invasion. Conditioned culture medium from ADAMTS9-transfected BT549 cells markedly disrupted tube formation ability of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) in Matrigel. Furthermore, ADAMTS9 inhibited AKT signaling and its downstream targets (MDM2, p53, p21, p27, E-cadherin, VIM, SNAIL, VEGFA, NFkappaB-p65 and MMP2). In addition, we demonstrated, for the first time, that ADAMTS9 inhibits AKT signaling, through suppressing its upstream activators EGFR and TGFbeta1/TbetaR(I/II) in breast cancer cells. Our results suggest that ADAMTS9 is a TSG epigenetically inactivated in breast cancer, which functions through blocking EGFR- and TGFbeta1/TbetaR(I/II)-activated AKT signaling.

. 
Identification of biomarkers for monitoring efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer patients is of utmost importance in individual tailoring of treatment and save from toxicity due to non-effective drugs. We hypothesized that methylation of circulating tumor-specific DNA may reflect changes in tumor burden in response to chemotherapy and help stratify responders from non-responders. The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential of methylation changes in circulating DNA to monitor treatment response of breast cancer patients. Six consecutive sera samples collected from 30 breast cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy were analyzed for methylation status of a panel of five genes namely, BRCA1, MGMT, GSTP1, Stratifin, and MDR1. Among these five genes, BRCA1 methylation frequency was different among responders and non-responders groups. The correlation coefficients between total gene methylation with initial chemotherapy and tumor volume reduction were R(2) = 0.8 and R(2) = 0.05 in the responders and non-responders groups, respectively. Our findings warrant further development of this approach for monitoring response in patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy.. Identification of biomarkers for monitoring efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer patients is of utmost importance in individual tailoring of treatment and save from toxicity due to non-effective drugs. We hypothesized that methylation of circulating tumor-specific DNA may reflect changes in tumor burden in response to chemotherapy and help stratify responders from non-responders. The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential of methylation changes in circulating DNA to monitor treatment response of breast cancer patients. Six consecutive sera samples collected from 30 breast cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy were analyzed for methylation status of a panel of five genes namely, BRCA1, MGMT, GSTP1, Stratifin, and MDR1. Among these five genes, BRCA1 methylation frequency was different among responders and non-responders groups. The correlation coefficients between total gene methylation with initial chemotherapy and tumor volume reduction were R(2) = 0.8 and R(2) = 0.05 in the responders and non-responders groups, respectively. Our findings warrant further development of this approach for monitoring response in patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Maspin is a serine protease inhibitor with tumor-suppressor activity. Maspin can suppress tumor growth and metastasis in vivo and tumor cell motility and invasion in vitro. Previous studies indicate that the loss of Maspin expression is closely linked to aberrant methylation of the Maspin promoter. We examined the promoter methylation status of Maspin in tumor and corresponding serum of breast cancer patients. In addition, protein expression of this gene was also assessed to determine possible correlation between promoter hypermethylation and gene silencing. Further, we investigated the correlation of Maspin expression with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A) and MTA1 expression. Maspin methylation was analyzed by methylation-specific PCR in 100 invasive ductal breast carcinoma patients' tumors and circulating DNA in a prospective study. Promoter hypermethylation was correlated with expression of the encoded protein in tumors by immunohistochemistry. Significant correlation was observed between promoter hypermethylation of Maspin (r = +0.88; p </= 0.0001) in tumors and paired sera. Significant association was found between Maspin promoter hypermethylation and loss of its protein expression (p = 0.01, OR = 3.1, 95% CI = 1.3-7.4). The expression of VEGF-A and MTA1 was lower in tumors with high Maspin expression compared to tumors with loss of Maspin expression. Our results indicate that aberrant promoter methylation is associated with loss of Maspin immunoreactivity in breast cancer tissues. Further, loss of Maspin expression is significantly correlated with increased expression of VEGF-A and MTA1.. Maspin is a serine protease inhibitor with tumor-suppressor activity. Maspin can suppress tumor growth and metastasis in vivo and tumor cell motility and invasion in vitro. Previous studies indicate that the loss of Maspin expression is closely linked to aberrant methylation of the Maspin promoter. We examined the promoter methylation status of Maspin in tumor and corresponding serum of breast cancer patients. In addition, protein expression of this gene was also assessed to determine possible correlation between promoter hypermethylation and gene silencing. Further, we investigated the correlation of Maspin expression with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A) and MTA1 expression. Maspin methylation was analyzed by methylation-specific PCR in 100 invasive ductal breast carcinoma patients' tumors and circulating DNA in a prospective study. Promoter hypermethylation was correlated with expression of the encoded protein in tumors by immunohistochemistry. Significant correlation was observed between promoter hypermethylation of Maspin (r = +0.88; p </= 0.0001) in tumors and paired sera. Significant association was found between Maspin promoter hypermethylation and loss of its protein expression (p = 0.01, OR = 3.1, 95% CI = 1.3-7.4). The expression of VEGF-A and MTA1 was lower in tumors with high Maspin expression compared to tumors with loss of Maspin expression. Our results indicate that aberrant promoter methylation is associated with loss of Maspin immunoreactivity in breast cancer tissues. Further, loss of Maspin expression is significantly correlated with increased expression of VEGF-A and MTA1.

INTRODUCTION: Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is frequent in triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) and results in a tumor phenotype similar to BRCA1-mutated tumors. BRCA1 mutation-associated cancers are more sensitive to DNA damaging agents as compared to conventional chemotherapy agents. It is not known if there is an interaction between the presence of BRCA1 promoter methylation (PM) and response to chemotherapy agents in sporadic TNBC. We sought to investigate the prognostic significance of BRCA1 PM in TNBC patients receiving standard chemotherapy. METHODS: Subjects with stage I-III TNBC treated with chemotherapy were identified and their formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor specimens retrieved. Genomic DNA was isolated and subjected to methylation-specific PCR (MSPCR). RESULTS: DNA was isolated from primary tumor of 39 subjects. BRCA1 PM was detected in 30% of patients. Presence of BRCA1 PM was associated with lower BRCA1 transcript levels, suggesting epigenetic BRCA1 silencing. All patients received chemotherapy (anthracycline:90%, taxane:69%). At a median follow-up of 64 months, 46% of patients have recurred and 36% have died. On univariate analysis, African-American race, node positivity, stage, and BRCA1 PM were associated with worse RFS and OS. Five year OS was 36% for patients with BRCA1 PM vs. 77% for patients without BRCA1 PM (p=0.004). On multivariable analysis, BRCA1 PM was associated with significantly worse RFS and OS. CONCLUSIONS: We show that BRCA1 PM is common in TNBC and has the potential to identify a significant fraction of TNBC patients who have suboptimal outcomes with standard chemotherapy.. INTRODUCTION: Methylation of the BRCA1 promoter is frequent in triple negative breast cancers (TNBC) and results in a tumor phenotype similar to BRCA1-mutated tumors. BRCA1 mutation-associated cancers are more sensitive to DNA damaging agents as compared to conventional chemotherapy agents. It is not known if there is an interaction between the presence of BRCA1 promoter methylation (PM) and response to chemotherapy agents in sporadic TNBC. We sought to investigate the prognostic significance of BRCA1 PM in TNBC patients receiving standard chemotherapy. METHODS: Subjects with stage I-III TNBC treated with chemotherapy were identified and their formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor specimens retrieved. Genomic DNA was isolated and subjected to methylation-specific PCR (MSPCR). RESULTS: DNA was isolated from primary tumor of 39 subjects. BRCA1 PM was detected in 30% of patients. Presence of BRCA1 PM was associated with lower BRCA1 transcript levels, suggesting epigenetic BRCA1 silencing. All patients received chemotherapy (anthracycline:90%, taxane:69%). At a median follow-up of 64 months, 46% of patients have recurred and 36% have died. On univariate analysis, African-American race, node positivity, stage, and BRCA1 PM were associated with worse RFS and OS. Five year OS was 36% for patients with BRCA1 PM vs. 77% for patients without BRCA1 PM (p=0.004). On multivariable analysis, BRCA1 PM was associated with significantly worse RFS and OS. CONCLUSIONS: We show that BRCA1 PM is common in TNBC and has the potential to identify a significant fraction of TNBC patients who have suboptimal outcomes with standard chemotherapy.

BACKGROUND: Cancer cells typically exhibit large-scale aberrant methylation of gene promoters. Some of the genes with promoter methylation alterations play "driver" roles in tumorigenesis, whereas others are only "passengers". RESULTS: Based on the assumption that promoter methylation alteration of a driver gene may lead to expression alternation of a set of genes associated with cancer pathways, we developed a computational framework for integrating promoter methylation and gene expression data to identify driver methylation aberrations of cancer. Applying this approach to breast cancer data, we identified many novel cancer driver genes and found that some of the identified driver genes were subtype-specific for basal-like, luminal-A and HER2+ subtypes of breast cancer. CONCLUSION: The proposed framework proved effective in identifying cancer driver genes from genome-wide gene methylation and expression data of cancer. These results may provide new molecular targets for potential targeted and selective epigenetic therapy.. BACKGROUND: Cancer cells typically exhibit large-scale aberrant methylation of gene promoters. Some of the genes with promoter methylation alterations play "driver" roles in tumorigenesis, whereas others are only "passengers". RESULTS: Based on the assumption that promoter methylation alteration of a driver gene may lead to expression alternation of a set of genes associated with cancer pathways, we developed a computational framework for integrating promoter methylation and gene expression data to identify driver methylation aberrations of cancer. Applying this approach to breast cancer data, we identified many novel cancer driver genes and found that some of the identified driver genes were subtype-specific for basal-like, luminal-A and HER2+ subtypes of breast cancer. CONCLUSION: The proposed framework proved effective in identifying cancer driver genes from genome-wide gene methylation and expression data of cancer. These results may provide new molecular targets for potential targeted and selective epigenetic therapy.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a class of newly recognized DNA transcripts that have diverse biological activities. Dysregulation of lncRNAs may be involved in many pathogenic processes including cancer. Recently, we found an intergenic lncRNA, LINC00472, whose expression was correlated with breast cancer progression and patient survival. Our findings were consistent across multiple clinical datasets and supported by results from in vitro experiments. To evaluate further the role of LINC00472 in breast cancer, we used various online databases to investigate possible mechanisms that might affect LINC00472 expression in breast cancer. We also analyzed associations of LINC00472 with estrogen receptor, tumor grade, and molecular subtypes in additional online datasets generated by microarray platforms different from the one we investigated previously. We found that LINC00472 expression in breast cancer was regulated more possibly by promoter methylation than by the alteration of gene copy number. Analysis of additional datasets confirmed our previous findings of high expression of LINC00472 associated with ER-positive and low-grade tumors and favorable molecular subtypes. Finally, in nine datasets, we examined the association of LINC00472 expression with disease-free survival in patients with grade 2 tumors. Meta-analysis of the datasets showed that LINC00472 expression in breast tumors predicted the recurrence of breast cancer in patients with grade 2 tumors. In summary, our analyses confirm that LINC00472 is functionally a tumor suppressor, and that assessing its expression in breast tumors may have clinical implications in breast cancer management.. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a class of newly recognized DNA transcripts that have diverse biological activities. Dysregulation of lncRNAs may be involved in many pathogenic processes including cancer. Recently, we found an intergenic lncRNA, LINC00472, whose expression was correlated with breast cancer progression and patient survival. Our findings were consistent across multiple clinical datasets and supported by results from in vitro experiments. To evaluate further the role of LINC00472 in breast cancer, we used various online databases to investigate possible mechanisms that might affect LINC00472 expression in breast cancer. We also analyzed associations of LINC00472 with estrogen receptor, tumor grade, and molecular subtypes in additional online datasets generated by microarray platforms different from the one we investigated previously. We found that LINC00472 expression in breast cancer was regulated more possibly by promoter methylation than by the alteration of gene copy number. Analysis of additional datasets confirmed our previous findings of high expression of LINC00472 associated with ER-positive and low-grade tumors and favorable molecular subtypes. Finally, in nine datasets, we examined the association of LINC00472 expression with disease-free survival in patients with grade 2 tumors. Meta-analysis of the datasets showed that LINC00472 expression in breast tumors predicted the recurrence of breast cancer in patients with grade 2 tumors. In summary, our analyses confirm that LINC00472 is functionally a tumor suppressor, and that assessing its expression in breast tumors may have clinical implications in breast cancer management.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation variability regions (MVRs) across the oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene have been identified in peripheral blood cells from breast cancer patients and healthy individuals. In contrast to promoter methylation, gene body methylation may be important in maintaining active transcription. This study aimed to assess MVRs in ESR1 in breast cancer cell lines, tumour biopsies and exfoliated epithelial cells from expressed breast milk (EBM), to determine their significance for ESR1 transcription. METHODS: DNA methylation levels in eight MVRs across ESR1 were assessed by pyrosequencing bisulphite-converted DNA from three oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive and three ER-negative breast cancer cell lines. DNA methylation and expression were assessed following treatment with DAC (1 muM), or DMSO (controls). ESR1 methylation levels were also assayed in DNA from 155 invasive ductal carcinoma biopsies provided by the Breast Cancer Campaign Tissue Bank, and validated with DNA methylation profiles from the TCGA breast tumours (n = 356 ER-pos, n = 109 ER-neg). DNA methylation was profiled in exfoliated breast epithelial cells from EBM using the Illumina 450 K (n = 36) and pyrosequencing in a further 53 donor samples. ESR1 mRNA levels were measured by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: We show that ER-positive cell lines had unmethylated ESR1 promoter regions and highly methylated intragenic regions (median, 80.45%) while ER-negative cells had methylated promoters and lower intragenic methylation levels (median, 38.62%). DAC treatment increased ESR1 expression in ER-negative cells, but significantly reduced methylation and expression of ESR1 in ER-positive cells. The ESR1 promoter was unmethylated in breast tumour biopsies with high levels of intragenic methylation, independent of ER status. However, ESR1 methylation in the strongly ER-positive EBM DNA samples were very similar to ER-positive tumour cell lines. CONCLUSION: DAC treatment inhibited ESR1 transcription in cells with an unmethylated ESR1 promoter and reduced intragenic DNA methylation. Intragenic methylation levels correlated with ESR1 expression in homogenous cell populations (cell lines and exfoliated primary breast epithelial cells), but not in heterogeneous tumour biopsies, highlighting the significant differences between the in vivo tumour microenvironment and individual homogenous cell types. These findings emphasise the need for care when choosing material for epigenetic research and highlights the presence of aberrant intragenic methylation levels in tumour tissue.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation variability regions (MVRs) across the oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene have been identified in peripheral blood cells from breast cancer patients and healthy individuals. In contrast to promoter methylation, gene body methylation may be important in maintaining active transcription. This study aimed to assess MVRs in ESR1 in breast cancer cell lines, tumour biopsies and exfoliated epithelial cells from expressed breast milk (EBM), to determine their significance for ESR1 transcription. METHODS: DNA methylation levels in eight MVRs across ESR1 were assessed by pyrosequencing bisulphite-converted DNA from three oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive and three ER-negative breast cancer cell lines. DNA methylation and expression were assessed following treatment with DAC (1 muM), or DMSO (controls). ESR1 methylation levels were also assayed in DNA from 155 invasive ductal carcinoma biopsies provided by the Breast Cancer Campaign Tissue Bank, and validated with DNA methylation profiles from the TCGA breast tumours (n = 356 ER-pos, n = 109 ER-neg). DNA methylation was profiled in exfoliated breast epithelial cells from EBM using the Illumina 450 K (n = 36) and pyrosequencing in a further 53 donor samples. ESR1 mRNA levels were measured by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: We show that ER-positive cell lines had unmethylated ESR1 promoter regions and highly methylated intragenic regions (median, 80.45%) while ER-negative cells had methylated promoters and lower intragenic methylation levels (median, 38.62%). DAC treatment increased ESR1 expression in ER-negative cells, but significantly reduced methylation and expression of ESR1 in ER-positive cells. The ESR1 promoter was unmethylated in breast tumour biopsies with high levels of intragenic methylation, independent of ER status. However, ESR1 methylation in the strongly ER-positive EBM DNA samples were very similar to ER-positive tumour cell lines. CONCLUSION: DAC treatment inhibited ESR1 transcription in cells with an unmethylated ESR1 promoter and reduced intragenic DNA methylation. Intragenic methylation levels correlated with ESR1 expression in homogenous cell populations (cell lines and exfoliated primary breast epithelial cells), but not in heterogeneous tumour biopsies, highlighting the significant differences between the in vivo tumour microenvironment and individual homogenous cell types. These findings emphasise the need for care when choosing material for epigenetic research and highlights the presence of aberrant intragenic methylation levels in tumour tissue.

PURPOSE: Breast Cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths among women worldwide. The role of epigenetics as a distinct mechanism to alter gene expression in a tissue-specific manner has emerged as an important mechanism in the pathophysiology of cancer. Present study was carried out to assess the role of methylation in regulating transcription and protein expression of Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2), an oncogene with parental imprinting. METHODS: Paraffin-embedded archival breast tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples were used for carrying out PCR-based methylation assay, genomic PCR, immunohistochemistry and Real-Time Reverse transcriptase PCR. RESULTS: A significant loss of methylation in exon 9 CpG cluster of IGF2 in breast tumor tissues was observed when compared to normal tissue (P < 0.0001). Expression of IGF2 by immunohistochemistry exhibited a mean twofold increase correlating with the hypomethylation of this specific CpG. Real-Time RT PCR showed increased transcripts in the tumor tissue supporting the IHC and methylation results. A total of 33% of tumor samples heterozygous for the ApaI IGF2 polymorphism exhibited biallelic IGF2 expression due to loss of imprinting; this was not seen in any of the normal breast tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Altered methylation of exonic CpG plays an important role in the enhanced transcription/expression of IGF2 in breast tumors. Methylation analysis of exon 9 CpG can be used as a biomarker for upregulation of IGF2 in breast tumor tissue and maybe developed as a diagnostic test in future.. PURPOSE: Breast Cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths among women worldwide. The role of epigenetics as a distinct mechanism to alter gene expression in a tissue-specific manner has emerged as an important mechanism in the pathophysiology of cancer. Present study was carried out to assess the role of methylation in regulating transcription and protein expression of Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2), an oncogene with parental imprinting. METHODS: Paraffin-embedded archival breast tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples were used for carrying out PCR-based methylation assay, genomic PCR, immunohistochemistry and Real-Time Reverse transcriptase PCR. RESULTS: A significant loss of methylation in exon 9 CpG cluster of IGF2 in breast tumor tissues was observed when compared to normal tissue (P < 0.0001). Expression of IGF2 by immunohistochemistry exhibited a mean twofold increase correlating with the hypomethylation of this specific CpG. Real-Time RT PCR showed increased transcripts in the tumor tissue supporting the IHC and methylation results. A total of 33% of tumor samples heterozygous for the ApaI IGF2 polymorphism exhibited biallelic IGF2 expression due to loss of imprinting; this was not seen in any of the normal breast tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Altered methylation of exonic CpG plays an important role in the enhanced transcription/expression of IGF2 in breast tumors. Methylation analysis of exon 9 CpG can be used as a biomarker for upregulation of IGF2 in breast tumor tissue and maybe developed as a diagnostic test in future.

PURPOSE: To analyze the relationship between the expression of SASH1 and its methylation level of SASH1 gene promoter in human breast cancer. METHODS: Expression levels of SASH1 were examined in breast cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues with immunohistochemistry and with real time PCR (RT-PCR) methylation analysis was performed with MassArray. RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed that SASH1 expression was strongly reduced in breast cancer compared with adjacent normal tissues. Quantitative methylation analysis by MassArray revealed that CpG sites in SASH1 promoter shared similar methylation pattern in tumor tissue and adjacent normal tissue. The CpG sites with significant difference in methylation level were CpG_26.27 and CpG_54.55. Moreover, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc) treatment of tumor cell line MDA-MB-231 caused significant elevation of SASH1 mRNA. CONCLUSION: Based on these data, we propose that increase of DNA methylation level in the promoter region of gene SASH1, particularly CpG_26.27 or CpG_54.55 sites, possibly repressed SASH1 expression in breast cancer.. PURPOSE: To analyze the relationship between the expression of SASH1 and its methylation level of SASH1 gene promoter in human breast cancer. METHODS: Expression levels of SASH1 were examined in breast cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues with immunohistochemistry and with real time PCR (RT-PCR) methylation analysis was performed with MassArray. RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed that SASH1 expression was strongly reduced in breast cancer compared with adjacent normal tissues. Quantitative methylation analysis by MassArray revealed that CpG sites in SASH1 promoter shared similar methylation pattern in tumor tissue and adjacent normal tissue. The CpG sites with significant difference in methylation level were CpG_26.27 and CpG_54.55. Moreover, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc) treatment of tumor cell line MDA-MB-231 caused significant elevation of SASH1 mRNA. CONCLUSION: Based on these data, we propose that increase of DNA methylation level in the promoter region of gene SASH1, particularly CpG_26.27 or CpG_54.55 sites, possibly repressed SASH1 expression in breast cancer.

The membrane-anchored glycoprotein RECK negatively regulates multiple metalloproteinases and is frequently downregulated in tumors. Forced RECK expression in cancer cells results in suppression of tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis in xenograft models. A previous methylome study on breast cancer tissues detected inverse correlation between RECK CpG methylation (in an intron-1 region) and relapse-free survival. In this study, we focused on another region of the RECK CpG island (a promoter/exon-1 region) and found an inverse correlation between its methylation and RECK-inducibility by an HDAC inhibitor, MS275, among a panel of breast cancer cell lines (n=15). In clinical samples (n=62), RECK intron-1 methylation was prevalent among luminal breast cancers as reported previously (26 of 38 cases; 68%) and particularly enriched in tumors of the ER+PR- subclass (10 of 10 cases) and of higher histological grades (Grade 2 and 3; 28 of 43 cases; P=0.006). In about a half of these cases, promoter/exon-1 methylation was absent, and hence, RECK may be inducible by certain drugs such as MS275. Our results indicate the value of combined use of two RECK methylation markers for predicting prognosis and drug-sensitivity of breast cancers.. The membrane-anchored glycoprotein RECK negatively regulates multiple metalloproteinases and is frequently downregulated in tumors. Forced RECK expression in cancer cells results in suppression of tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis in xenograft models. A previous methylome study on breast cancer tissues detected inverse correlation between RECK CpG methylation (in an intron-1 region) and relapse-free survival. In this study, we focused on another region of the RECK CpG island (a promoter/exon-1 region) and found an inverse correlation between its methylation and RECK-inducibility by an HDAC inhibitor, MS275, among a panel of breast cancer cell lines (n=15). In clinical samples (n=62), RECK intron-1 methylation was prevalent among luminal breast cancers as reported previously (26 of 38 cases; 68%) and particularly enriched in tumors of the ER+PR- subclass (10 of 10 cases) and of higher histological grades (Grade 2 and 3; 28 of 43 cases; P=0.006). In about a half of these cases, promoter/exon-1 methylation was absent, and hence, RECK may be inducible by certain drugs such as MS275. Our results indicate the value of combined use of two RECK methylation markers for predicting prognosis and drug-sensitivity of breast cancers.

It is well-documented that the methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) and of H3K9 are mutually exclusive, an epigenetic phenomenon conserved from yeast to humans. How this opposed methylation modification is accomplished and coordinated in mammalian cells is poorly understood. Here we report that the H3K9 trimethyl demethylase JMJD2B is an integral component of the H3K4-specific methyltransferase, the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) 2 complex. We show that the JMJD2B/MLL2 complex is copurified with estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and is required for ERalpha-regulated transcription. We demonstrate that H3K9 demethylation and H3K4 methylation are coordinated in ERalpha-activated transcription such that H3K9 demethylation is a prerequisite for H3K4 methylation. Significantly, depletion of JMJD2B impairs the estrogen-induced G(1)/S transition of the cell cycle in vitro and inhibits breast tumorigenesis in vivo. Interestingly, JMJD2B itself is an ERalpha target gene, and forms a feed-forward regulatory loop in regulation of the hormone response. Our results provide a molecular basis for the coordinated H3K4 methylation/H3K9 demethylation in transcription activation, link the trimethyl demethylase JMJD2B to euchromatin functions, and provide a mechanism for JMJD2B in breast carcinogenesis.. It is well-documented that the methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) and of H3K9 are mutually exclusive, an epigenetic phenomenon conserved from yeast to humans. How this opposed methylation modification is accomplished and coordinated in mammalian cells is poorly understood. Here we report that the H3K9 trimethyl demethylase JMJD2B is an integral component of the H3K4-specific methyltransferase, the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) 2 complex. We show that the JMJD2B/MLL2 complex is copurified with estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and is required for ERalpha-regulated transcription. We demonstrate that H3K9 demethylation and H3K4 methylation are coordinated in ERalpha-activated transcription such that H3K9 demethylation is a prerequisite for H3K4 methylation. Significantly, depletion of JMJD2B impairs the estrogen-induced G(1)/S transition of the cell cycle in vitro and inhibits breast tumorigenesis in vivo. Interestingly, JMJD2B itself is an ERalpha target gene, and forms a feed-forward regulatory loop in regulation of the hormone response. Our results provide a molecular basis for the coordinated H3K4 methylation/H3K9 demethylation in transcription activation, link the trimethyl demethylase JMJD2B to euchromatin functions, and provide a mechanism for JMJD2B in breast carcinogenesis.

BACKGROUND: We assessed the expression of methylation-related proteins 5-meC, DNMT1, and ISL-1 in breast cancer and evaluated their relationship to clinicopathological factors. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for ER, PR, HER-2, Ki-67, 5-meC, DNMT1, and ISL-1 were performed on 348 breast cancer samples in tissue microarray. Samples were subgrouped into luminal A, luminal B, HER-2, or triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) according to immunohistochemical staining for ER, PR, HER-2, and Ki-67. The tumor stroma was histologically subtyped into desmoplastic, sclerotic, normal-like, or inflammatory type. RESULTS: Tumor expression of DNMT1 differed by molecular subtype: it was higher in TNBC and lower in luminal A (p < 0.001) samples. DNMT1 expression was also related to higher histologic grade, ER negativity, PR negativity, and higher Ki-67 LI (p < 0.001). In western blot, protein expressions of DNMT1 and ISL-1 were higher in TNBC and relatively lower in the remaining subtypes. High tumor expression of DNMT1 was associated with shorter OS in univariate analysis (p = 0.041). DNMT1 and 5-meC were differentially expressed by stromal phenotype: 5-meC was higher in normal-like type and lower in sclerotic type (p = 0.049); DNMT1 was higher in inflammatory and lower in sclerotic type (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Tumor expression of DNMT1 in breast cancer differed by molecular subtype and stromal histological type. DNMT1 was highly expressed in TNBC and in breast cancer with inflammatory stromal type.. BACKGROUND: We assessed the expression of methylation-related proteins 5-meC, DNMT1, and ISL-1 in breast cancer and evaluated their relationship to clinicopathological factors. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for ER, PR, HER-2, Ki-67, 5-meC, DNMT1, and ISL-1 were performed on 348 breast cancer samples in tissue microarray. Samples were subgrouped into luminal A, luminal B, HER-2, or triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) according to immunohistochemical staining for ER, PR, HER-2, and Ki-67. The tumor stroma was histologically subtyped into desmoplastic, sclerotic, normal-like, or inflammatory type. RESULTS: Tumor expression of DNMT1 differed by molecular subtype: it was higher in TNBC and lower in luminal A (p < 0.001) samples. DNMT1 expression was also related to higher histologic grade, ER negativity, PR negativity, and higher Ki-67 LI (p < 0.001). In western blot, protein expressions of DNMT1 and ISL-1 were higher in TNBC and relatively lower in the remaining subtypes. High tumor expression of DNMT1 was associated with shorter OS in univariate analysis (p = 0.041). DNMT1 and 5-meC were differentially expressed by stromal phenotype: 5-meC was higher in normal-like type and lower in sclerotic type (p = 0.049); DNMT1 was higher in inflammatory and lower in sclerotic type (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Tumor expression of DNMT1 in breast cancer differed by molecular subtype and stromal histological type. DNMT1 was highly expressed in TNBC and in breast cancer with inflammatory stromal type.

BACKGROUND: Studying whole blood DNA methylation as a risk marker has valuable applications in either diagnosis or staging of breast cancer. We investigated whole blood DNA methylation status of VIM, CXCR4, DOK7, and SPDEF genes in breast cancer patients in comparison to healthy control subjects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 60 patients with breast cancer and 40 healthy controls were examined. Genomic DNA isolated from peripheral blood and restriction enzyme polymerase chain reaction (REP) method was applied for analysis. Real-time PCR was used to confirm methylation status of the aforementioned genes and therefore to find out the methylation differences between normal and breast cancer subjects. RESULTS: Level of DOK7 promoter hypomethylation in normal and breast cancer samples was significant (P-value = 0.001). The study, also, showed that hypomethylation of VIM and CXCR4 genes are significant in patients compared with normal cases (P-value < 0.05). Furthermore, SPDEF promoter hypomethylation was not significantly differed between normal and breast cancer samples (P-value = 0.2). CONCLUSIONS: Hypermethylation of DOK7 gene in DNA from patients affected with breast cancer offers a biomarker for diagnosis of the breast cancer. This study indicates that methylation status of VIM and CXCR4 genes changes in breast cancer; so, they can be used as molecular biomarkers in breast cancer prognosis.. BACKGROUND: Studying whole blood DNA methylation as a risk marker has valuable applications in either diagnosis or staging of breast cancer. We investigated whole blood DNA methylation status of VIM, CXCR4, DOK7, and SPDEF genes in breast cancer patients in comparison to healthy control subjects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 60 patients with breast cancer and 40 healthy controls were examined. Genomic DNA isolated from peripheral blood and restriction enzyme polymerase chain reaction (REP) method was applied for analysis. Real-time PCR was used to confirm methylation status of the aforementioned genes and therefore to find out the methylation differences between normal and breast cancer subjects. RESULTS: Level of DOK7 promoter hypomethylation in normal and breast cancer samples was significant (P-value = 0.001). The study, also, showed that hypomethylation of VIM and CXCR4 genes are significant in patients compared with normal cases (P-value < 0.05). Furthermore, SPDEF promoter hypomethylation was not significantly differed between normal and breast cancer samples (P-value = 0.2). CONCLUSIONS: Hypermethylation of DOK7 gene in DNA from patients affected with breast cancer offers a biomarker for diagnosis of the breast cancer. This study indicates that methylation status of VIM and CXCR4 genes changes in breast cancer; so, they can be used as molecular biomarkers in breast cancer prognosis.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) through DNA methylation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Present study investigates the contribution of PTEN promoter methylation and its associated protein expression in sporadic breast cancer patients from North India. METHODS: A total of 360 paired breast carcinoma and adjacent normal tissue samples from 180 sporadic breast cancer patients were included in the present study and examined for PTEN promoter methylation status by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry method was used for determining PTEN protein expression. Molecular findings were statistically correlated with various clinicopathological parameters to identify associations of clinical relevance. RESULTS: Presence of PTEN promoter methylation (39.44 %) significantly correlated with its expression downregulation (45.56 %) in breast tumors (P = 0.0001). Furthermore, their interaction with various clinical parameters was evidenced in stratified analysis. Correlation of PTEN promoter methylation with histologically more malignant grade and PTEN expression loss with triple negative tumor status remained significant even after Bonferroni correction (P < 0.003). CONCLUSIONS: Results implicate promoter methylation to be a mechanism partially responsible for PTEN silencing in sporadic breast cancer for North Indian women. Besides, methylation and expression loss of PTEN exhibited promising potential as candidate biomarkers of risk assessment in subcategorized breast tumors with critical pathologic parameters.. BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) through DNA methylation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. Present study investigates the contribution of PTEN promoter methylation and its associated protein expression in sporadic breast cancer patients from North India. METHODS: A total of 360 paired breast carcinoma and adjacent normal tissue samples from 180 sporadic breast cancer patients were included in the present study and examined for PTEN promoter methylation status by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry method was used for determining PTEN protein expression. Molecular findings were statistically correlated with various clinicopathological parameters to identify associations of clinical relevance. RESULTS: Presence of PTEN promoter methylation (39.44 %) significantly correlated with its expression downregulation (45.56 %) in breast tumors (P = 0.0001). Furthermore, their interaction with various clinical parameters was evidenced in stratified analysis. Correlation of PTEN promoter methylation with histologically more malignant grade and PTEN expression loss with triple negative tumor status remained significant even after Bonferroni correction (P < 0.003). CONCLUSIONS: Results implicate promoter methylation to be a mechanism partially responsible for PTEN silencing in sporadic breast cancer for North Indian women. Besides, methylation and expression loss of PTEN exhibited promising potential as candidate biomarkers of risk assessment in subcategorized breast tumors with critical pathologic parameters.

Hypermethylation of exon 1 of p16INK4a was examined in tumour and plasma DNA of a series of breast cancer patients. De novo methylation was observed in the tumours of eight patients (23%), and in plasma DNA in five (14%) of these eight patients. Our data show that de novo methylation of exon 1 of p16INK4a can be demonstrated in plasma DNA of breast cancer patients, a fact that provides additional evidence of the tumour-related origin of free plasma DNA in cancer patients.. Hypermethylation of exon 1 of p16INK4a was examined in tumour and plasma DNA of a series of breast cancer patients. De novo methylation was observed in the tumours of eight patients (23%), and in plasma DNA in five (14%) of these eight patients. Our data show that de novo methylation of exon 1 of p16INK4a can be demonstrated in plasma DNA of breast cancer patients, a fact that provides additional evidence of the tumour-related origin of free plasma DNA in cancer patients.

Extracellular glycoproteins of the laminin family are essential components of basement membranes involved in a number of biological processes, including tissue differentiation, wound healing, and tumorigenesis. We present the first comprehensive study of promoter methylation status of the genes encoding laminin chains in normal tissues (peripheral blood leucocytes, buccal epithelial cells, autopsy breast tissue samples) and in breast carcinoma samples. Based on the results of this study, we divide laminin genes into three categories. Genes, constitutively methylated in breast tissues include LAMA3A, LAMB2, LAMB3, and LAMC2. Genes prone to abnormal methylation in breast carcinoma include LAMA1, LAMA2, LAMA3B, LAMA4, LAMB1, and LAMC3. Genes that are rarely if ever methylated in breast carcinoma include LAMA5 and LAMC1. The constitutively methylated group includes all of the genes that encode subunits of laminin-5 (the historical name of laminin 332), the promoters of which were previously considered unmethylated in normal tissues and prone to abnormal methylation in breast cancer.. Extracellular glycoproteins of the laminin family are essential components of basement membranes involved in a number of biological processes, including tissue differentiation, wound healing, and tumorigenesis. We present the first comprehensive study of promoter methylation status of the genes encoding laminin chains in normal tissues (peripheral blood leucocytes, buccal epithelial cells, autopsy breast tissue samples) and in breast carcinoma samples. Based on the results of this study, we divide laminin genes into three categories. Genes, constitutively methylated in breast tissues include LAMA3A, LAMB2, LAMB3, and LAMC2. Genes prone to abnormal methylation in breast carcinoma include LAMA1, LAMA2, LAMA3B, LAMA4, LAMB1, and LAMC3. Genes that are rarely if ever methylated in breast carcinoma include LAMA5 and LAMC1. The constitutively methylated group includes all of the genes that encode subunits of laminin-5 (the historical name of laminin 332), the promoters of which were previously considered unmethylated in normal tissues and prone to abnormal methylation in breast cancer.

Until recently, an elevated disease risk has been ascribed to a genetic predisposition, however, exciting progress over the past years has discovered alternate elements of inheritance that involve epigenetic regulation. Epigenetic changes are heritably stable alterations that include DNA methylation, histone modifications and RNA-mediated silencing. Aberrant DNA methylation is a common molecular basis for a number of important human diseases, including breast cancer. Changes in DNA methylation profoundly affect global gene expression patterns. What is emerging is a more dynamic and complex association between DNA methylation and gene expression than previously believed. Although many tools have already been developed for analyzing genome-wide gene expression data, tools for analyzing genome-wide DNA methylation have not yet reached the same level of refinement. Here we provide an in-depth analysis of DNA methylation in parallel with gene expression data characteristics and describe the particularities of low-level and high-level analyses of DNA methylation data. Low-level analysis refers to pre-processing of methylation data (i.e. normalization, transformation and filtering), whereas high-level analysis is focused on illustrating the application of the widely used class comparison, class prediction and class discovery methods to DNA methylation data. Furthermore, we investigate the influence of DNA methylation on gene expression by measuring the correlation between the degree of CpG methylation and the level of expression and to explore the pattern of methylation as a function of the promoter region.. Until recently, an elevated disease risk has been ascribed to a genetic predisposition, however, exciting progress over the past years has discovered alternate elements of inheritance that involve epigenetic regulation. Epigenetic changes are heritably stable alterations that include DNA methylation, histone modifications and RNA-mediated silencing. Aberrant DNA methylation is a common molecular basis for a number of important human diseases, including breast cancer. Changes in DNA methylation profoundly affect global gene expression patterns. What is emerging is a more dynamic and complex association between DNA methylation and gene expression than previously believed. Although many tools have already been developed for analyzing genome-wide gene expression data, tools for analyzing genome-wide DNA methylation have not yet reached the same level of refinement. Here we provide an in-depth analysis of DNA methylation in parallel with gene expression data characteristics and describe the particularities of low-level and high-level analyses of DNA methylation data. Low-level analysis refers to pre-processing of methylation data (i.e. normalization, transformation and filtering), whereas high-level analysis is focused on illustrating the application of the widely used class comparison, class prediction and class discovery methods to DNA methylation data. Furthermore, we investigate the influence of DNA methylation on gene expression by measuring the correlation between the degree of CpG methylation and the level of expression and to explore the pattern of methylation as a function of the promoter region.

BACKGROUND: This study attempts to understand the association of candidate tumour suppressor genes SH3GL2, CDKN2A (p16-p14) and CDKN2B (p15) in development of early-onset (group A) and late-onset (group B) breast carcinoma (BC). METHODS: Deletion, methylation, and mutation of the candidate tumour suppressor genes (TSGs) were analysed in 47 group A and 59 group B samples. Immunohistochemical analysis was used to identify the expression status of SH3GL2 and p16. Clinicopathological correlation of the alterations was analysed by the chi-square and log-rank tests. RESULTS: Higher frequency of overall alterations (46-62%) in SH3GL2 and p16-p14 than p15 (22-26%) indicated their importance in BC. Deletion frequencies were in the following order: group A: p14 (43%) > p16 (42%) > SH3GL2 (38%) > p15 (33%) and group B: p14 (36%) > p16 (33%) > SH3GL2 (31%) > p15 (14%) while, methylation frequencies were: group A: SH3GL2 (34%) > p16 (28%) > p14 (26%) > p15 (15%) and group B: SH3GL2 (36%) > p16 (31%) > p14 (29%) > p15 (15%). Infrequent mutation was observed only in CDKN2A common exon-2. Immunohistochemical analysis showed significant association between expression of SH3GL2 and p16 with their deletion (P = 0.01 and 0.02, respectively) and methylation status (P = 0.007 and 0.01, respectively). In group A, overall alterations of SH3GL2 showed significant association with CDKN2A locus with significant prognostic implications, whereas CDKN2A and CDKN2B loci were associated in both groups. CONCLUSIONS: The molecular mechanisms involving CDKN2A inactivation seem to follow similar pathway in the pathogenesis of both age groups of BC while significant association of SH3GL2 with CDKN2A might play a synergistic role in the development of group A.. BACKGROUND: This study attempts to understand the association of candidate tumour suppressor genes SH3GL2, CDKN2A (p16-p14) and CDKN2B (p15) in development of early-onset (group A) and late-onset (group B) breast carcinoma (BC). METHODS: Deletion, methylation, and mutation of the candidate tumour suppressor genes (TSGs) were analysed in 47 group A and 59 group B samples. Immunohistochemical analysis was used to identify the expression status of SH3GL2 and p16. Clinicopathological correlation of the alterations was analysed by the chi-square and log-rank tests. RESULTS: Higher frequency of overall alterations (46-62%) in SH3GL2 and p16-p14 than p15 (22-26%) indicated their importance in BC. Deletion frequencies were in the following order: group A: p14 (43%) > p16 (42%) > SH3GL2 (38%) > p15 (33%) and group B: p14 (36%) > p16 (33%) > SH3GL2 (31%) > p15 (14%) while, methylation frequencies were: group A: SH3GL2 (34%) > p16 (28%) > p14 (26%) > p15 (15%) and group B: SH3GL2 (36%) > p16 (31%) > p14 (29%) > p15 (15%). Infrequent mutation was observed only in CDKN2A common exon-2. Immunohistochemical analysis showed significant association between expression of SH3GL2 and p16 with their deletion (P = 0.01 and 0.02, respectively) and methylation status (P = 0.007 and 0.01, respectively). In group A, overall alterations of SH3GL2 showed significant association with CDKN2A locus with significant prognostic implications, whereas CDKN2A and CDKN2B loci were associated in both groups. CONCLUSIONS: The molecular mechanisms involving CDKN2A inactivation seem to follow similar pathway in the pathogenesis of both age groups of BC while significant association of SH3GL2 with CDKN2A might play a synergistic role in the development of group A.

For the first time in a comparative perspective the epigenetic status of the benign proliferative processes, breast cancer, and metastases to regional lymph nodes was studied using DNA methylation microarray "GoldenGate Cancer Panel I" ("Illumina", USA). The functional groups of differentially methylated genes were identified in each set of samples. The genes that regulate cell proliferation and mobility were methylated in samples with benign proliferative processes. An aberrant methylation of the genes responsible for cell differentiation and proliferation, as well as protein phosphorylation and cell mobility was observed in the samples with malignant phenotype. Differential methylation of the genes that regulate cell adhesion, the formation of anatomical structures, angiogenesis, immune response, signal transduction, and protein phosphorylation was found in the samples with metastases to regional lymph nodes in comparison with the morphologically unaltered breast epithelium. The tissues from the benign proliferative processes and metastases to regional lymph nodes were generally characterized by a relatively lower level of epigenetic variability in comparison with the tissues of the primary tumor.. For the first time in a comparative perspective the epigenetic status of the benign proliferative processes, breast cancer, and metastases to regional lymph nodes was studied using DNA methylation microarray "GoldenGate Cancer Panel I" ("Illumina", USA). The functional groups of differentially methylated genes were identified in each set of samples. The genes that regulate cell proliferation and mobility were methylated in samples with benign proliferative processes. An aberrant methylation of the genes responsible for cell differentiation and proliferation, as well as protein phosphorylation and cell mobility was observed in the samples with malignant phenotype. Differential methylation of the genes that regulate cell adhesion, the formation of anatomical structures, angiogenesis, immune response, signal transduction, and protein phosphorylation was found in the samples with metastases to regional lymph nodes in comparison with the morphologically unaltered breast epithelium. The tissues from the benign proliferative processes and metastases to regional lymph nodes were generally characterized by a relatively lower level of epigenetic variability in comparison with the tissues of the primary tumor.

Tumour development is characterised by the increased circulating DNA (cirDNA) concentration and by tumour-related changes in blood plasma DNA. Concentration of cirDNA and methylation of RARbeta2, RASSF1A and HIC-1 gene promoters were investigated in cell-free and cell-surface-bound fractions from healthy donors, patients with breast cancer, and patients with breast fibroadenoma. Tumour development was shown to lead to significant changes in the distribution of cirDNA between cell-free and cell-surface-bound fractions. Analysis of RARbeta2 and RASSF1A methylation in the total cirDNA provides 95% diagnostic coverage in breast cancer patients, 60% in patients with benign lesions, and is without false-positive results in healthy women. Results of the study indicate that methylation-specific PCR of RARbeta2 and RASSF1A genes based on the total cirDNA combined with the quantitative analysis of cirDNA distribution between cell-bound and cell-free fractions in blood provide the sensitive and accurate detection and discrimination of malignant and benign breast tumours.. Tumour development is characterised by the increased circulating DNA (cirDNA) concentration and by tumour-related changes in blood plasma DNA. Concentration of cirDNA and methylation of RARbeta2, RASSF1A and HIC-1 gene promoters were investigated in cell-free and cell-surface-bound fractions from healthy donors, patients with breast cancer, and patients with breast fibroadenoma. Tumour development was shown to lead to significant changes in the distribution of cirDNA between cell-free and cell-surface-bound fractions. Analysis of RARbeta2 and RASSF1A methylation in the total cirDNA provides 95% diagnostic coverage in breast cancer patients, 60% in patients with benign lesions, and is without false-positive results in healthy women. Results of the study indicate that methylation-specific PCR of RARbeta2 and RASSF1A genes based on the total cirDNA combined with the quantitative analysis of cirDNA distribution between cell-bound and cell-free fractions in blood provide the sensitive and accurate detection and discrimination of malignant and benign breast tumours.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) significantly affects the risk of metastasising in breast cancer. Plasticity and reversibility of EMT suggest that epigenetic mechanisms could be the key drivers of these processes, but little is known about the dynamics of EMT-related epigenetic alterations. We hypothesised that EMT, mediated by autocrine and paracrine signals, will be accompanied by changes in DNA methylation profiles. Therefore, conditioned medium from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells was used for induction of EMT in human breast cancer SK-BR-3 cell line. EMT-related morphological alterations and changes in gene expression of EMT-associated markers were assessed. To reverse EMT, 20 nm size gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) synthesized by the citrate reduction method were applied. Finally, DNA methylation of LINE-1 sequences and promoter methylation of TIMP3, ADAM23 and BRMS1 genes were quantitatively evaluated by pyrosequencing. Despite the presence of EMT-associated morphological and gene expression changes in tumour cells, EMT induced by adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells had almost no effect on LINE-1 and gene-specific DNA methylation patterns of TIMP3, ADAM23 and BRMS1 genes. Although treatment for 24, 48 or 72 hours with 20 nm AuNPs at a concentration of 3 microg/ml slightly decreased gene expression of EMT-associated markers in SK-BR-3 cells, it did not alter global or gene-specific DNA methylation. Our results suggest that changes in DNA methylation are not detectable in vitro in early phases of EMT. Previously published positive findings could represent rather the sustained presence of potent EMT-inducing signals or the synergistic effect of various epigenetic mechanisms. Treatment with AuNPs slightly attenuated EMT, and their therapeutic potential needs to be further investigated.. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) significantly affects the risk of metastasising in breast cancer. Plasticity and reversibility of EMT suggest that epigenetic mechanisms could be the key drivers of these processes, but little is known about the dynamics of EMT-related epigenetic alterations. We hypothesised that EMT, mediated by autocrine and paracrine signals, will be accompanied by changes in DNA methylation profiles. Therefore, conditioned medium from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells was used for induction of EMT in human breast cancer SK-BR-3 cell line. EMT-related morphological alterations and changes in gene expression of EMT-associated markers were assessed. To reverse EMT, 20 nm size gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) synthesized by the citrate reduction method were applied. Finally, DNA methylation of LINE-1 sequences and promoter methylation of TIMP3, ADAM23 and BRMS1 genes were quantitatively evaluated by pyrosequencing. Despite the presence of EMT-associated morphological and gene expression changes in tumour cells, EMT induced by adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells had almost no effect on LINE-1 and gene-specific DNA methylation patterns of TIMP3, ADAM23 and BRMS1 genes. Although treatment for 24, 48 or 72 hours with 20 nm AuNPs at a concentration of 3 microg/ml slightly decreased gene expression of EMT-associated markers in SK-BR-3 cells, it did not alter global or gene-specific DNA methylation. Our results suggest that changes in DNA methylation are not detectable in vitro in early phases of EMT. Previously published positive findings could represent rather the sustained presence of potent EMT-inducing signals or the synergistic effect of various epigenetic mechanisms. Treatment with AuNPs slightly attenuated EMT, and their therapeutic potential needs to be further investigated.

INTRODUCTION: Individuals with germline mutations in the BRCA1 gene have an elevated risk of developing breast cancer, and often display characteristic clinicopathological features. We hypothesised that inactivation of BRCA1 by promoter methylation could occur as a germline or an early somatic event that predisposes to breast cancer with the phenotype normally associated with BRCA1 germline mutation. METHODS: We examined seven cases from breast-ovarian cancer families with tumours that showed BRCA1-like pathology but did not have detectable BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline mutations present. Methylation levels were tested by several quantitative techniques including MethyLight, methylation-sensitive high resolution melting (MS-HRM) and a newly developed digital MS-HRM assay. RESULTS: In one patient, methylation of 10% of the BRCA1 alleles was detected in the peripheral blood DNA, consistent with 20% of cells having one methylated allele. Buccal mucosa DNA from this individual displayed approximately 5% BRCA1 methylation. In two other patients, methylation of BRCA1 was detected in the peripheral blood at significantly lower but still readily detectable levels (approximately 1%). Tumour DNAs from these three patients were heavily methylated at BRCA1. The other patients had no detectable BRCA1 methylation in their peripheral blood. One of seven age-matched controls showed extremely low levels of methylation in their peripheral blood (approximately 0.1%). CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that in some cases of breast cancer, low-level promoter methylation of BRCA1 occurs in normal tissues of the body and is associated with the development of BRCA1-like breast cancer.. INTRODUCTION: Individuals with germline mutations in the BRCA1 gene have an elevated risk of developing breast cancer, and often display characteristic clinicopathological features. We hypothesised that inactivation of BRCA1 by promoter methylation could occur as a germline or an early somatic event that predisposes to breast cancer with the phenotype normally associated with BRCA1 germline mutation. METHODS: We examined seven cases from breast-ovarian cancer families with tumours that showed BRCA1-like pathology but did not have detectable BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline mutations present. Methylation levels were tested by several quantitative techniques including MethyLight, methylation-sensitive high resolution melting (MS-HRM) and a newly developed digital MS-HRM assay. RESULTS: In one patient, methylation of 10% of the BRCA1 alleles was detected in the peripheral blood DNA, consistent with 20% of cells having one methylated allele. Buccal mucosa DNA from this individual displayed approximately 5% BRCA1 methylation. In two other patients, methylation of BRCA1 was detected in the peripheral blood at significantly lower but still readily detectable levels (approximately 1%). Tumour DNAs from these three patients were heavily methylated at BRCA1. The other patients had no detectable BRCA1 methylation in their peripheral blood. One of seven age-matched controls showed extremely low levels of methylation in their peripheral blood (approximately 0.1%). CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that in some cases of breast cancer, low-level promoter methylation of BRCA1 occurs in normal tissues of the body and is associated with the development of BRCA1-like breast cancer.

Breast cancer is more common in European Americans (EAs) than in African Americans (AAs) but mortality from breast cancer is higher among AAs. While there are racial differences in DNA methylation and gene expression in breast tumors, little is known whether such racial differences exist in breast tissues of healthy women. Genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression profiling was performed in histologically normal breast tissues of healthy women. Linear regression models were used to identify differentially-methylated CpG sites (CpGs) between EAs (n = 61) and AAs (n = 22). Correlations for methylation and expression were assessed. Biological functions of the differentially-methylated genes were assigned using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Among 485 differentially-methylated CpGs by race, 203 were hypermethylated in EAs, and 282 were hypermethylated in AAs. Promoter-related differentially-methylated CpGs were more frequently hypermethylated in EAs (52%) than AAs (27%) while gene body and intergenic CpGs were more frequently hypermethylated in AAs. The differentially-methylated CpGs were enriched for cancer-associated genes with roles in cell death and survival, cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling. In a separate analysis for correlation in EAs and AAs, different patterns of correlation were found between EAs and AAs. The correlated genes showed different biological networks between EAs and AAs; networks were connected by Ubiquitin C. To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive genome-wide study to identify differences in methylation and gene expression between EAs and AAs in breast tissues from healthy women. These findings may provide further insights regarding the contribution of epigenetic differences to racial disparities in breast cancer.. Breast cancer is more common in European Americans (EAs) than in African Americans (AAs) but mortality from breast cancer is higher among AAs. While there are racial differences in DNA methylation and gene expression in breast tumors, little is known whether such racial differences exist in breast tissues of healthy women. Genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression profiling was performed in histologically normal breast tissues of healthy women. Linear regression models were used to identify differentially-methylated CpG sites (CpGs) between EAs (n = 61) and AAs (n = 22). Correlations for methylation and expression were assessed. Biological functions of the differentially-methylated genes were assigned using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Among 485 differentially-methylated CpGs by race, 203 were hypermethylated in EAs, and 282 were hypermethylated in AAs. Promoter-related differentially-methylated CpGs were more frequently hypermethylated in EAs (52%) than AAs (27%) while gene body and intergenic CpGs were more frequently hypermethylated in AAs. The differentially-methylated CpGs were enriched for cancer-associated genes with roles in cell death and survival, cellular development, and cell-to-cell signaling. In a separate analysis for correlation in EAs and AAs, different patterns of correlation were found between EAs and AAs. The correlated genes showed different biological networks between EAs and AAs; networks were connected by Ubiquitin C. To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive genome-wide study to identify differences in methylation and gene expression between EAs and AAs in breast tissues from healthy women. These findings may provide further insights regarding the contribution of epigenetic differences to racial disparities in breast cancer.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in one-carbon metabolism genes and lifestyle factors (alcohol drinking and breast folate) may be determinants of whole-genome methylation in the breast. DNA methylation profiling was performed using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip in 81 normal breast tissues from women undergoing reduction mammoplasty and no history of cancer. ANCOVA, adjusting for age, race and BMI, was used to identify differentially-methylated (DM) CpGs. Gene expression, by the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0, was correlated with DM. Biological networks of DM genes were assigned using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Fifty-seven CpG sites were DM in association with eight SNPs in FTHFD, MTHFD1, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, and TYMS (P <5.0 x 10(-5)); 56% of the DM CpGs were associated with FTHFD SNPs, including DM within FTHFD. Gene expression was negatively correlated with FTHFD methylation (r=-0.25, P=0.017). Four DM CpGs identified by SNPs in MTRR, MTHFR, and FTHFD were significantly associated with alcohol consumption and/or breast folate. The top biological network of DM CpGs was associated with Energy Production, Molecular Transportation, and Nucleic Acid Metabolism. This is the first comprehensive study of the association between SNPs in one-carbon metabolism genes and genome-wide DNA methylation in normal breast tissues. These SNPs, especially FTHFD, as well as alcohol intake and folate exposure, appear to affect DM in breast tissues of healthy women. The finding that SNPs in FTHFD and MTR are associated with their own methylation is novel and highlights a role for these SNPs as cis-methylation quantitative trait loci.. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in one-carbon metabolism genes and lifestyle factors (alcohol drinking and breast folate) may be determinants of whole-genome methylation in the breast. DNA methylation profiling was performed using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip in 81 normal breast tissues from women undergoing reduction mammoplasty and no history of cancer. ANCOVA, adjusting for age, race and BMI, was used to identify differentially-methylated (DM) CpGs. Gene expression, by the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Transcriptome Array 2.0, was correlated with DM. Biological networks of DM genes were assigned using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Fifty-seven CpG sites were DM in association with eight SNPs in FTHFD, MTHFD1, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, and TYMS (P <5.0 x 10(-5)); 56% of the DM CpGs were associated with FTHFD SNPs, including DM within FTHFD. Gene expression was negatively correlated with FTHFD methylation (r=-0.25, P=0.017). Four DM CpGs identified by SNPs in MTRR, MTHFR, and FTHFD were significantly associated with alcohol consumption and/or breast folate. The top biological network of DM CpGs was associated with Energy Production, Molecular Transportation, and Nucleic Acid Metabolism. This is the first comprehensive study of the association between SNPs in one-carbon metabolism genes and genome-wide DNA methylation in normal breast tissues. These SNPs, especially FTHFD, as well as alcohol intake and folate exposure, appear to affect DM in breast tissues of healthy women. The finding that SNPs in FTHFD and MTR are associated with their own methylation is novel and highlights a role for these SNPs as cis-methylation quantitative trait loci.

Despite known age-related DNA methylation (aDNAm) changes in breast tumors, little is known about aDNAm in normal breast tissues. Breast tissues from a cross-sectional study of 121 cancer-free women, were assayed for genome-wide DNA methylation. mRNA expression was assayed by microarray technology. Analysis of covariance was used to identify aDNAm's. Altered methylation was correlated with expression of the corresponding gene and with DNA methyltransferase protein DNMT3A, assayed by immunohistochemistry. Publically-available TCGA-BRCA data were used for replication. 1,214 aDNAm's were identified; 97% with increased methylation, and all on autosomes. Sites with increased methylation were predominantly in CpG lslands and non-enhancers. aDNAm's with decreased methylation were generally located in intergenic regions, non-CpG Islands, and enhancers. Of the aDNAm's identified, 650 are known to be involved in cancer, including ESR1 and beta-estradiol responsive genes. Expression of DNMT3A was positively associated with age. Two aDNAm's showed borderline significant associations with DNMT3A expression; KRR1 (OR 6.57, 95% CI: 2.51-17.23) and DHRS12 (OR 6.08, 95% CI: 2.33-15.86). A subset of aDNAm's co-localized within vulnerable regions for somatic mutations in cancers including breast cancer. Expression of C19orf48 was inversely and significantly correlated with its methylation level. In the TCGA dataset, 84% and 64% of the previously identified aDNAm's were correlated with age in both normal-adjacent and tumor breast tissues, with differential associations by histological subtype. Given the similarity of findings in the breast tissues of healthy women and breast tumors, aDNAm's may be one pathway for increased breast cancer risk with age.. Despite known age-related DNA methylation (aDNAm) changes in breast tumors, little is known about aDNAm in normal breast tissues. Breast tissues from a cross-sectional study of 121 cancer-free women, were assayed for genome-wide DNA methylation. mRNA expression was assayed by microarray technology. Analysis of covariance was used to identify aDNAm's. Altered methylation was correlated with expression of the corresponding gene and with DNA methyltransferase protein DNMT3A, assayed by immunohistochemistry. Publically-available TCGA-BRCA data were used for replication. 1,214 aDNAm's were identified; 97% with increased methylation, and all on autosomes. Sites with increased methylation were predominantly in CpG lslands and non-enhancers. aDNAm's with decreased methylation were generally located in intergenic regions, non-CpG Islands, and enhancers. Of the aDNAm's identified, 650 are known to be involved in cancer, including ESR1 and beta-estradiol responsive genes. Expression of DNMT3A was positively associated with age. Two aDNAm's showed borderline significant associations with DNMT3A expression; KRR1 (OR 6.57, 95% CI: 2.51-17.23) and DHRS12 (OR 6.08, 95% CI: 2.33-15.86). A subset of aDNAm's co-localized within vulnerable regions for somatic mutations in cancers including breast cancer. Expression of C19orf48 was inversely and significantly correlated with its methylation level. In the TCGA dataset, 84% and 64% of the previously identified aDNAm's were correlated with age in both normal-adjacent and tumor breast tissues, with differential associations by histological subtype. Given the similarity of findings in the breast tissues of healthy women and breast tumors, aDNAm's may be one pathway for increased breast cancer risk with age.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a candidate oncogenic driver due to its prevalent overexpression and aberrant repression of tumor suppressor genes in diverse cancers. Therefore, blocking EZH2 enzyme activity may present a valid therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancers with EZH2 overexpression including breast cancers. Here, we described ZLD1039 a potent, highly selective, and orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of EZH2, which inhibited breast tumor growth and metastasis. ZLD1039 considerably inhibited EZH2 methyltransferase activity with nanomolar potency, decreased global histone-3 lysine-27 (H3K27) methylation, and reactivated silenced tumor suppressors connected to increased survival of patients with breast cancer. Comparable to conditional silencing of EZH2, its inhibition by ZLD1039 decreased cell proliferation, cell cycle arrest, and induced apoptosis. Comparably, treatment of xenograft-bearing mice with ZLD1039 led to tumor growth regression and metastasis inhibition. These data confirmed the dependency of breast cancer progression on EZH2 activity and the usefulness of ZLD1039 as a promising treatment for breast cancer.. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a candidate oncogenic driver due to its prevalent overexpression and aberrant repression of tumor suppressor genes in diverse cancers. Therefore, blocking EZH2 enzyme activity may present a valid therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancers with EZH2 overexpression including breast cancers. Here, we described ZLD1039 a potent, highly selective, and orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of EZH2, which inhibited breast tumor growth and metastasis. ZLD1039 considerably inhibited EZH2 methyltransferase activity with nanomolar potency, decreased global histone-3 lysine-27 (H3K27) methylation, and reactivated silenced tumor suppressors connected to increased survival of patients with breast cancer. Comparable to conditional silencing of EZH2, its inhibition by ZLD1039 decreased cell proliferation, cell cycle arrest, and induced apoptosis. Comparably, treatment of xenograft-bearing mice with ZLD1039 led to tumor growth regression and metastasis inhibition. These data confirmed the dependency of breast cancer progression on EZH2 activity and the usefulness of ZLD1039 as a promising treatment for breast cancer.

Post-translational histone H3 modifications regulate transcriptional competence. The mechanisms by which the epigenome is regulated in response to oncogenic signaling remain unclear. Here we show that H3K4me3 is increased in breast tumors driven by an activated PIK3CA allele and that inhibition of PI3K/AKT signaling reduces promoter-associated H3K4me3 in human breast cancer cells. We show that the H3K4 demethylase KDM5A is an AKT target and that phosphorylation of KDM5A regulates its nuclear localization and promoter occupancy. Supporting a role for KDM5A in mediating PI3K/AKT transcriptional effects, the decreased expression in response to AKT inhibition of a subset of cell-cycle genes associated with poor clinical outcome is blunted by KDM5A silencing. Our data identify a mechanism by which PI3K/AKT signaling modulates the cancer epigenome through controlling H3K4 methylation and suggest that KDM5A subcellular localization and genome occupancy may be pharmacodynamic markers of the activity of PI3K/AKT inhibitors currently in clinical development.. Post-translational histone H3 modifications regulate transcriptional competence. The mechanisms by which the epigenome is regulated in response to oncogenic signaling remain unclear. Here we show that H3K4me3 is increased in breast tumors driven by an activated PIK3CA allele and that inhibition of PI3K/AKT signaling reduces promoter-associated H3K4me3 in human breast cancer cells. We show that the H3K4 demethylase KDM5A is an AKT target and that phosphorylation of KDM5A regulates its nuclear localization and promoter occupancy. Supporting a role for KDM5A in mediating PI3K/AKT transcriptional effects, the decreased expression in response to AKT inhibition of a subset of cell-cycle genes associated with poor clinical outcome is blunted by KDM5A silencing. Our data identify a mechanism by which PI3K/AKT signaling modulates the cancer epigenome through controlling H3K4 methylation and suggest that KDM5A subcellular localization and genome occupancy may be pharmacodynamic markers of the activity of PI3K/AKT inhibitors currently in clinical development.

INTRODUCTION: It has been shown in some articles that genetic and epigenetic abnormalities cannot only be found in tumor tissues but also in adjacent regions that appear histologically normal. This phenomenon is metaphorically called field cancerization or field defect. Field cancerization is regarded as clinically significant because it is assumed to be an important factor in local recurrence of cancer. As the field showing these molecular abnormalities may not be removed completely by surgery, these changes might lead to neoplasms and subsequent transformation to a tumor. We aimed to investigate the applicability of the methylation status of six tumor suppressor genes as biomarkers for detecting field cancerization in breast cancer. METHODS: The promoter methylation status of CCND2, DAPK1, GSTP1, HIN-1, MGMT and RASSF1A was determined by methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) analysis. MS-HRM methods for CCND2, MGMT and RASSF1A were developed in-house, primer sequences for DAPK1, GSTP1 and HIN-1 have already been published. Biopsy samples were taken from tumor, tumor-adjacent and tumor-distant tissue from 17 breast cancer patients. Normal breast tissues of four healthy women served as controls. RESULTS: All MS-HRM methods proved to be very sensitive. LODs were in the range from 0.1 to 1.5 %, LOQs ranged from 0.3 to 5.3 %. A total of 94 %, 82 % and 65 % of the tumors showed methylation of RASSF1A, HIN-1 and MGMT promoters, respectively. The methylation status of these promoters was significantly lower in tumor-distant tissues than in tumor tissues. Tumor-adjacent tissues showed higher methylation status of RASSF1A, HIN-1 and MGMT promoters than tumor-distant tissues, indicating field cancerization. The methylation status of the HIN-1 promoter in tumor-adjacent tissues was found to correlate strongly with that in the corresponding tumors (r = 0.785, p < 0.001), but not with that in the corresponding tumor-distant tissues (r = 0.312, p = 0.239). CONCLUSIONS: Among the gene promoters investigated, the methylation status of the HIN-1 promoter can be considered the best suitable biomarker for detecting field cancerization. Further investigation is needed to test whether it can be used for defining surgical margins in order to prevent future recurrence of breast cancer.. INTRODUCTION: It has been shown in some articles that genetic and epigenetic abnormalities cannot only be found in tumor tissues but also in adjacent regions that appear histologically normal. This phenomenon is metaphorically called field cancerization or field defect. Field cancerization is regarded as clinically significant because it is assumed to be an important factor in local recurrence of cancer. As the field showing these molecular abnormalities may not be removed completely by surgery, these changes might lead to neoplasms and subsequent transformation to a tumor. We aimed to investigate the applicability of the methylation status of six tumor suppressor genes as biomarkers for detecting field cancerization in breast cancer. METHODS: The promoter methylation status of CCND2, DAPK1, GSTP1, HIN-1, MGMT and RASSF1A was determined by methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) analysis. MS-HRM methods for CCND2, MGMT and RASSF1A were developed in-house, primer sequences for DAPK1, GSTP1 and HIN-1 have already been published. Biopsy samples were taken from tumor, tumor-adjacent and tumor-distant tissue from 17 breast cancer patients. Normal breast tissues of four healthy women served as controls. RESULTS: All MS-HRM methods proved to be very sensitive. LODs were in the range from 0.1 to 1.5 %, LOQs ranged from 0.3 to 5.3 %. A total of 94 %, 82 % and 65 % of the tumors showed methylation of RASSF1A, HIN-1 and MGMT promoters, respectively. The methylation status of these promoters was significantly lower in tumor-distant tissues than in tumor tissues. Tumor-adjacent tissues showed higher methylation status of RASSF1A, HIN-1 and MGMT promoters than tumor-distant tissues, indicating field cancerization. The methylation status of the HIN-1 promoter in tumor-adjacent tissues was found to correlate strongly with that in the corresponding tumors (r = 0.785, p < 0.001), but not with that in the corresponding tumor-distant tissues (r = 0.312, p = 0.239). CONCLUSIONS: Among the gene promoters investigated, the methylation status of the HIN-1 promoter can be considered the best suitable biomarker for detecting field cancerization. Further investigation is needed to test whether it can be used for defining surgical margins in order to prevent future recurrence of breast cancer.

Overexpression of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 in tumor tissues is considered a major cause of limited efficacy of anticancer drugs. Gene expression of ABC transporters is regulated by multiple mechanisms, including changes in the DNA methylation status. Most of the studies published so far only report promoter methylation levels for either ABCB1 or ABCG2, and data on the methylation status for ABCC1 are scarce. Thus, we determined the promoter methylation patterns of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 in 19 human cancer cell lines. In order to contribute to the elucidation of the role of DNA methylation changes in acquisition of a multidrug resistant (MDR) phenotype, we also analyzed the promoter methylation patterns in drug-resistant sublines of the cancer cell lines GLC-4, SW1573, KB-3-1 and HL-60. In addition, we investigated if aberrant promoter methylation levels of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 occur in tumor and tumor-surrounding tissues from breast cancer patients.Our data indicates that hypomethylation of the ABCC1 promoter is not cancer type-specific but occurs in cancer cell lines of different origins. Promoter methylation was found to be an important mechanism in gene regulation of ABCB1 in parental cancer cell lines and their drug-resistant sublines. Overexpression of ABCC1 in MDR cell models turned out to be mediated by gene amplification, not by changes in the promoter methylation status of ABCC1. In contrast to the promoters of ABCC1 and ABCG2, the promoter of ABCB1 was significantly higher methylated in tumor tissues than in tumor-adjacent and tumor-distant tissues from breast cancer patients.. Overexpression of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 in tumor tissues is considered a major cause of limited efficacy of anticancer drugs. Gene expression of ABC transporters is regulated by multiple mechanisms, including changes in the DNA methylation status. Most of the studies published so far only report promoter methylation levels for either ABCB1 or ABCG2, and data on the methylation status for ABCC1 are scarce. Thus, we determined the promoter methylation patterns of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 in 19 human cancer cell lines. In order to contribute to the elucidation of the role of DNA methylation changes in acquisition of a multidrug resistant (MDR) phenotype, we also analyzed the promoter methylation patterns in drug-resistant sublines of the cancer cell lines GLC-4, SW1573, KB-3-1 and HL-60. In addition, we investigated if aberrant promoter methylation levels of ABCB1, ABCC1 and ABCG2 occur in tumor and tumor-surrounding tissues from breast cancer patients.Our data indicates that hypomethylation of the ABCC1 promoter is not cancer type-specific but occurs in cancer cell lines of different origins. Promoter methylation was found to be an important mechanism in gene regulation of ABCB1 in parental cancer cell lines and their drug-resistant sublines. Overexpression of ABCC1 in MDR cell models turned out to be mediated by gene amplification, not by changes in the promoter methylation status of ABCC1. In contrast to the promoters of ABCC1 and ABCG2, the promoter of ABCB1 was significantly higher methylated in tumor tissues than in tumor-adjacent and tumor-distant tissues from breast cancer patients.

We examined the methylation status of the Ep-CAM promoter region of human breast cancer cell lines and breast cancer tissue using MethyLight technology and bisulfite sequencing. We found the promoter of Ep-CAM-negative breast cancer cell lines Hs 578T to be methylated to a higher degree as compared to positive cell lines MCF-7. Demethylation of cell lines was performed using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Ep-CAM RNA and protein expression could be partially restored by treating cells with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In most primary breast cancer tissue, methylation of the Ep-CAM gene could be detected at a low level and no correlation was found with Ep-CAM protein expression in tumour tissue. Taken together, these data suggest that methylation of the Ep-CAM promoter is not a crucial mechanism for regulation of Ep-CAM expression in breast cancer. Thus, most important regulatory mechanisms have to be supposed in vivo.. We examined the methylation status of the Ep-CAM promoter region of human breast cancer cell lines and breast cancer tissue using MethyLight technology and bisulfite sequencing. We found the promoter of Ep-CAM-negative breast cancer cell lines Hs 578T to be methylated to a higher degree as compared to positive cell lines MCF-7. Demethylation of cell lines was performed using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Ep-CAM RNA and protein expression could be partially restored by treating cells with 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In most primary breast cancer tissue, methylation of the Ep-CAM gene could be detected at a low level and no correlation was found with Ep-CAM protein expression in tumour tissue. Taken together, these data suggest that methylation of the Ep-CAM promoter is not a crucial mechanism for regulation of Ep-CAM expression in breast cancer. Thus, most important regulatory mechanisms have to be supposed in vivo.

It is well established that transcriptional silencing of critical tumor-suppressor genes by DNA methylation is a fundamental component in the initiation of breast cancer. However, the involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) in restoring abnormal DNA methylation patterns in breast cancer is not well understood. Therefore, we investigated whether miRNA-29b, due to its complimentarity to the 3'- untranslated region of DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) and DNMT3B, could restore normal DNA methylation patterns in human breast cancers and breast cancer cell lines. We demonstrated that transfection of pre-miRNA-29b into less aggressive MCF-7 cells, but not MDA-MB-231 mesenchymal cells, inhibited cell proliferation, decreased DNMT3A and DNMT3B messenger RNA (mRNA), and decreased promoter methylation status of ADAM23 , CCNA1, CCND2, CDH1, CDKN1C, CDKN2A, HIC1, RASSF1, SLIT2, TNFRSF10D, and TP73 tumor-suppressor genes. Using methylation polymerase chain reaction (PCR) arrays and real-time PCR, we also demonstrated that the methylation status of several critical tumor-suppressor genes increased as stage of breast disease increased, while miRNA-29b mRNA levels were significantly decreased in breast cancers versus normal breast. This increase in methylation status was accompanied by an increase in DNMT1 and DNMT3B mRNA in advanced stage of human breast cancers and in MCF-7, MDA-MB-361, HCC70, Hs-578T, and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells as compared to normal breast specimens and MCF-10-2A, a non-tumorigenic breast cell line, respectively. Our findings highlight the potential for a new epigenetic approach in improving breast cancer therapy by targeting DNMT3A and DNMT3B through miRNA-29b in non-invasive epithelial breast cancer cells.. It is well established that transcriptional silencing of critical tumor-suppressor genes by DNA methylation is a fundamental component in the initiation of breast cancer. However, the involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) in restoring abnormal DNA methylation patterns in breast cancer is not well understood. Therefore, we investigated whether miRNA-29b, due to its complimentarity to the 3'- untranslated region of DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) and DNMT3B, could restore normal DNA methylation patterns in human breast cancers and breast cancer cell lines. We demonstrated that transfection of pre-miRNA-29b into less aggressive MCF-7 cells, but not MDA-MB-231 mesenchymal cells, inhibited cell proliferation, decreased DNMT3A and DNMT3B messenger RNA (mRNA), and decreased promoter methylation status of ADAM23 , CCNA1, CCND2, CDH1, CDKN1C, CDKN2A, HIC1, RASSF1, SLIT2, TNFRSF10D, and TP73 tumor-suppressor genes. Using methylation polymerase chain reaction (PCR) arrays and real-time PCR, we also demonstrated that the methylation status of several critical tumor-suppressor genes increased as stage of breast disease increased, while miRNA-29b mRNA levels were significantly decreased in breast cancers versus normal breast. This increase in methylation status was accompanied by an increase in DNMT1 and DNMT3B mRNA in advanced stage of human breast cancers and in MCF-7, MDA-MB-361, HCC70, Hs-578T, and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells as compared to normal breast specimens and MCF-10-2A, a non-tumorigenic breast cell line, respectively. Our findings highlight the potential for a new epigenetic approach in improving breast cancer therapy by targeting DNMT3A and DNMT3B through miRNA-29b in non-invasive epithelial breast cancer cells.

Methods to determine individualized breast cancer risk lack sufficient sensitivity to select women most likely to benefit from preventive strategies. Alterations in DNA methylation occur early in breast cancer. We hypothesized that cancer-specific methylation markers could enhance breast cancer risk assessment. We evaluated 380 women without a history of breast cancer. We determined their menopausal status or menstrual cycle phase, risk of developing breast cancer (Gail model), and breast density and obtained random fine-needle aspiration (rFNA) samples for assessment of cytopathology and cumulative methylation index (CMI). Eight methylated gene markers were identified through whole-genome methylation analysis and included novel and previously established breast cancer detection genes. We performed correlative and multivariate linear regression analyses to evaluate DNA methylation of a gene panel as a function of clinical factors associated with breast cancer risk. CMI and individual gene methylation were independent of age, menopausal status or menstrual phase, lifetime Gail risk score, and breast density. CMI and individual gene methylation for the eight genes increased significantly (P < 0.001) with increasing cytological atypia. The findings were verified with multivariate analyses correcting for age, log (Gail), log (percent density), rFNA cell number, and body mass index. Our results demonstrate a significant association between cytological atypia and high CMI, which does not vary with menstrual phase or menopause and is independent of Gail risk and mammographic density. Thus, CMI is an excellent candidate breast cancer risk biomarker, warranting larger prospective studies to establish its utility for cancer risk assessment. Cancer Prev Res; 9(8); 673-82. (c)2016 AACR.. Methods to determine individualized breast cancer risk lack sufficient sensitivity to select women most likely to benefit from preventive strategies. Alterations in DNA methylation occur early in breast cancer. We hypothesized that cancer-specific methylation markers could enhance breast cancer risk assessment. We evaluated 380 women without a history of breast cancer. We determined their menopausal status or menstrual cycle phase, risk of developing breast cancer (Gail model), and breast density and obtained random fine-needle aspiration (rFNA) samples for assessment of cytopathology and cumulative methylation index (CMI). Eight methylated gene markers were identified through whole-genome methylation analysis and included novel and previously established breast cancer detection genes. We performed correlative and multivariate linear regression analyses to evaluate DNA methylation of a gene panel as a function of clinical factors associated with breast cancer risk. CMI and individual gene methylation were independent of age, menopausal status or menstrual phase, lifetime Gail risk score, and breast density. CMI and individual gene methylation for the eight genes increased significantly (P < 0.001) with increasing cytological atypia. The findings were verified with multivariate analyses correcting for age, log (Gail), log (percent density), rFNA cell number, and body mass index. Our results demonstrate a significant association between cytological atypia and high CMI, which does not vary with menstrual phase or menopause and is independent of Gail risk and mammographic density. Thus, CMI is an excellent candidate breast cancer risk biomarker, warranting larger prospective studies to establish its utility for cancer risk assessment. Cancer Prev Res; 9(8); 673-82. (c)2016 AACR.

Aberrations in DNA methylation patterns have been reported to be involved in driving changes in the expression of numerous genes during carcinogenesis and have become promising targets for chemopreventive action of natural compounds. In the present study, we investigated the effects of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), vitamin D(3) and resveratrol alone and in combination with adenosine analogues, 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (2CdA) and 9-beta-d-arabinosyl-2-fluoroadenine (F-ara-A), on the methylation and expression of phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) tumour suppressor gene in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. The present results showed that in non-invasive MCF-7 cells, ATRA, vitamin D(3) and resveratrol possess high efficacy in the reduction of PTEN promoter methylation. It was associated with PTEN induction as well as DNA methyltransferase down-regulation and p21 up-regulation after treatments with vitamin D(3) and resveratrol, suggesting a complex regulation of the DNA methylation machinery. Vitamin D(3) and resveratrol improved the inhibitory effects of 2CdA and F-ara-A on PTEN methylation in MCF-7 cells; however, only the combined action of vitamin D(3) and 2CdA boosted the induction of PTEN expression, suggesting a cooperation of these compounds in additional processes driving changes in PTEN expression. In contrast, in highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, only vitamin D(3) reduced PTEN methylation and induced its expression without notable effects in combined treatments. The present results suggest that natural compounds can find application in epigenetic anticancer therapy aimed at inhibition of promoter methylation of tumour suppressor genes and induction of their expression at early stages of carcinogenesis.. Aberrations in DNA methylation patterns have been reported to be involved in driving changes in the expression of numerous genes during carcinogenesis and have become promising targets for chemopreventive action of natural compounds. In the present study, we investigated the effects of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), vitamin D(3) and resveratrol alone and in combination with adenosine analogues, 2-chloro-2'-deoxyadenosine (2CdA) and 9-beta-d-arabinosyl-2-fluoroadenine (F-ara-A), on the methylation and expression of phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) tumour suppressor gene in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. The present results showed that in non-invasive MCF-7 cells, ATRA, vitamin D(3) and resveratrol possess high efficacy in the reduction of PTEN promoter methylation. It was associated with PTEN induction as well as DNA methyltransferase down-regulation and p21 up-regulation after treatments with vitamin D(3) and resveratrol, suggesting a complex regulation of the DNA methylation machinery. Vitamin D(3) and resveratrol improved the inhibitory effects of 2CdA and F-ara-A on PTEN methylation in MCF-7 cells; however, only the combined action of vitamin D(3) and 2CdA boosted the induction of PTEN expression, suggesting a cooperation of these compounds in additional processes driving changes in PTEN expression. In contrast, in highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, only vitamin D(3) reduced PTEN methylation and induced its expression without notable effects in combined treatments. The present results suggest that natural compounds can find application in epigenetic anticancer therapy aimed at inhibition of promoter methylation of tumour suppressor genes and induction of their expression at early stages of carcinogenesis.

BACKGROUND: DNA repair of alkylation damage is defective in various cancers. This occurs through somatically acquired inactivation of the MGMT gene in various cancer types, including breast cancers. In addition to MGMT, the two E. coli AlkB homologs ALKBH2 and ALKBH3 have also been linked to direct reversal of alkylation damage. However, it is currently unknown whether ALKBH2 or ALKBH3 are found inactivated in cancer. METHODS: Methylome datasets (GSE52865, GSE20713, GSE69914), available through Omnibus, were used to determine whether ALKBH2 or ALKBH3 are found inactivated by CpG promoter methylation. TCGA dataset enabled us to then assess the impact of CpG promoter methylation on mRNA expression for both ALKBH2 and ALKBH3. DNA methylation analysis for the ALKBH3 promoter region was carried out by pyrosequencing (PyroMark Q24) in 265 primary breast tumours and 30 proximal normal breast tissue samples along with 8 breast-derived cell lines. ALKBH3 mRNA and protein expression were analysed in cell lines using RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. DNA alkylation damage assay was carried out in cell lines based on immunofluorescence and confocal imaging. Data on clinical parameters and survival outcomes in patients were obtained and assessed in relation to ALKBH3 promoter methylation. RESULTS: The ALKBH3 gene, but not ALKBH2, undergoes CpG promoter methylation and transcriptional silencing in breast cancer. We developed a quantitative alkylation DNA damage assay based on immunofluorescence and confocal imaging revealing higher levels of alkylation damage in association with epigenetic inactivation of the ALKBH3 gene (P = 0.029). In our cohort of 265 primary breast cancer, we found 72 cases showing aberrantly high CpG promoter methylation over the ALKBH3 promoter (27%; 72 out of 265). We further show that increasingly higher degree of ALKBH3 promoter methylation is associated with reduced breast-cancer specific survival times in patients. In this analysis, ALKBH3 promoter methylation at >20% CpG methylation was found to be statistically significantly associated with reduced survival (HR = 2.3; P = 0.012). By thresholding at the clinically relevant CpG methylation level (>20%), we find the incidence of ALKBH3 promoter methylation to be 5% (13 out of 265). CONCLUSIONS: ALKBH3 is a novel addition to the catalogue of DNA repair genes found inactivated in breast cancer. Our results underscore a link between defective alkylation repair and breast cancer which, additionally, is found in association with poor disease outcome.. BACKGROUND: DNA repair of alkylation damage is defective in various cancers. This occurs through somatically acquired inactivation of the MGMT gene in various cancer types, including breast cancers. In addition to MGMT, the two E. coli AlkB homologs ALKBH2 and ALKBH3 have also been linked to direct reversal of alkylation damage. However, it is currently unknown whether ALKBH2 or ALKBH3 are found inactivated in cancer. METHODS: Methylome datasets (GSE52865, GSE20713, GSE69914), available through Omnibus, were used to determine whether ALKBH2 or ALKBH3 are found inactivated by CpG promoter methylation. TCGA dataset enabled us to then assess the impact of CpG promoter methylation on mRNA expression for both ALKBH2 and ALKBH3. DNA methylation analysis for the ALKBH3 promoter region was carried out by pyrosequencing (PyroMark Q24) in 265 primary breast tumours and 30 proximal normal breast tissue samples along with 8 breast-derived cell lines. ALKBH3 mRNA and protein expression were analysed in cell lines using RT-PCR and Western blotting, respectively. DNA alkylation damage assay was carried out in cell lines based on immunofluorescence and confocal imaging. Data on clinical parameters and survival outcomes in patients were obtained and assessed in relation to ALKBH3 promoter methylation. RESULTS: The ALKBH3 gene, but not ALKBH2, undergoes CpG promoter methylation and transcriptional silencing in breast cancer. We developed a quantitative alkylation DNA damage assay based on immunofluorescence and confocal imaging revealing higher levels of alkylation damage in association with epigenetic inactivation of the ALKBH3 gene (P = 0.029). In our cohort of 265 primary breast cancer, we found 72 cases showing aberrantly high CpG promoter methylation over the ALKBH3 promoter (27%; 72 out of 265). We further show that increasingly higher degree of ALKBH3 promoter methylation is associated with reduced breast-cancer specific survival times in patients. In this analysis, ALKBH3 promoter methylation at >20% CpG methylation was found to be statistically significantly associated with reduced survival (HR = 2.3; P = 0.012). By thresholding at the clinically relevant CpG methylation level (>20%), we find the incidence of ALKBH3 promoter methylation to be 5% (13 out of 265). CONCLUSIONS: ALKBH3 is a novel addition to the catalogue of DNA repair genes found inactivated in breast cancer. Our results underscore a link between defective alkylation repair and breast cancer which, additionally, is found in association with poor disease outcome.

In cancer, epigenetic states are deregulated and thought to be of significance in cancer development and progression. We explored DNA methylation-based signatures in association with breast cancer subtypes to assess their impact on clinical presentation and patient prognosis. DNA methylation was analyzed using Infinium 450K arrays in 40 tumors and 17 normal breast samples, together with DNA copy number changes and subtype-specific markers by tissue microarrays. The identified methylation signatures were validated against a cohort of 212 tumors annotated for breast cancer subtypes by the PAM50 method (The Cancer Genome Atlas). Selected markers were pyrosequenced in an independent validation cohort of 310 tumors and analyzed with respect to survival, clinical stage and grade. The results demonstrate that DNA methylation patterns linked to the luminal-B subtype are characterized by CpG island promoter methylation events. In contrast, a large fraction of basal-like tumors are characterized by hypomethylation events occurring within the gene body. Based on these hallmark signatures, we defined two DNA methylation-based subtypes, Epi-LumB and Epi-Basal, and show that they are associated with unfavorable clinical parameters and reduced survival. Our data show that distinct mechanisms leading to changes in CpG methylation states are operative in different breast cancer subtypes. Importantly, we show that a few selected proxy markers can be used to detect the distinct DNA methylation-based subtypes thereby providing valuable information on disease prognosis.. In cancer, epigenetic states are deregulated and thought to be of significance in cancer development and progression. We explored DNA methylation-based signatures in association with breast cancer subtypes to assess their impact on clinical presentation and patient prognosis. DNA methylation was analyzed using Infinium 450K arrays in 40 tumors and 17 normal breast samples, together with DNA copy number changes and subtype-specific markers by tissue microarrays. The identified methylation signatures were validated against a cohort of 212 tumors annotated for breast cancer subtypes by the PAM50 method (The Cancer Genome Atlas). Selected markers were pyrosequenced in an independent validation cohort of 310 tumors and analyzed with respect to survival, clinical stage and grade. The results demonstrate that DNA methylation patterns linked to the luminal-B subtype are characterized by CpG island promoter methylation events. In contrast, a large fraction of basal-like tumors are characterized by hypomethylation events occurring within the gene body. Based on these hallmark signatures, we defined two DNA methylation-based subtypes, Epi-LumB and Epi-Basal, and show that they are associated with unfavorable clinical parameters and reduced survival. Our data show that distinct mechanisms leading to changes in CpG methylation states are operative in different breast cancer subtypes. Importantly, we show that a few selected proxy markers can be used to detect the distinct DNA methylation-based subtypes thereby providing valuable information on disease prognosis.

Analysis of cancer methylomes has dramatically changed our concept of the potential of diagnostic and prognostic methylation biomarkers in disease stratification. Through whole-genome methylation capture sequencing of triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) we recently identified differentially methylated regions with diagnostic and prognostic value that promise to stratify TNBCs for more personalized management.. Analysis of cancer methylomes has dramatically changed our concept of the potential of diagnostic and prognostic methylation biomarkers in disease stratification. Through whole-genome methylation capture sequencing of triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) we recently identified differentially methylated regions with diagnostic and prognostic value that promise to stratify TNBCs for more personalized management.

Epigenetic alterations in the cancer methylome are common in breast cancer and provide novel options for tumour stratification. Here, we perform whole-genome methylation capture sequencing on small amounts of DNA isolated from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and matched normal samples. We identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) enriched with promoters associated with transcription factor binding sites and DNA hypersensitive sites. Importantly, we stratify TNBCs into three distinct methylation clusters associated with better or worse prognosis and identify 17 DMRs that show a strong association with overall survival, including DMRs located in the Wilms tumour 1 (WT1) gene, bi-directional-promoter and antisense WT1-AS. Our data reveal that coordinated hypermethylation can occur in oestrogen receptor-negative disease, and that characterizing the epigenetic framework provides a potential signature to stratify TNBCs. Together, our findings demonstrate the feasibility of profiling the cancer methylome with limited archival tissue to identify regulatory regions associated with cancer.. Epigenetic alterations in the cancer methylome are common in breast cancer and provide novel options for tumour stratification. Here, we perform whole-genome methylation capture sequencing on small amounts of DNA isolated from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and matched normal samples. We identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) enriched with promoters associated with transcription factor binding sites and DNA hypersensitive sites. Importantly, we stratify TNBCs into three distinct methylation clusters associated with better or worse prognosis and identify 17 DMRs that show a strong association with overall survival, including DMRs located in the Wilms tumour 1 (WT1) gene, bi-directional-promoter and antisense WT1-AS. Our data reveal that coordinated hypermethylation can occur in oestrogen receptor-negative disease, and that characterizing the epigenetic framework provides a potential signature to stratify TNBCs. Together, our findings demonstrate the feasibility of profiling the cancer methylome with limited archival tissue to identify regulatory regions associated with cancer.

With the recent comprehensive mapping of cancer genomes, there is now a need for functional approaches to edit the aberrant epigenetic state of key cancer drivers to reprogram the epi-pathology of the disease. In this study we utilized a programmable DNA-binding methyltransferase to induce targeted incorporation of DNA methylation (DNAme) in the SOX2 oncogene in breast cancer through a six zinc finger (ZF) protein linked to DNA methyltransferase 3A (ZF-DNMT3A). We demonstrated long-lasting oncogenic repression, which was maintained even after suppression of ZF-DNMT3A expression in tumor cells. The de novo DNAme was faithfully propagated and maintained through cell generations even after the suppression of the expression of the chimeric methyltransferase in the tumor cells. Xenograft studies in NUDE mice demonstrated stable SOX2 repression and long-term breast tumor growth inhibition, which lasted for >100 days post implantation of the tumor cells in mice. This was accompanied with a faithful maintenance of DNAme in the breast cancer implants. In contrast, downregulation of SOX2 by ZF domains engineered with the Krueppel-associated box repressor domain resulted in a transient and reversible suppression of oncogenic gene expression. Our results indicated that targeted de novo DNAme of the SOX2 oncogenic promoter was sufficient to induce long-lasting epigenetic silencing, which was not only maintained during cell division but also significantly delayed the tumorigenic phenotype of cancer cells in vivo, even in the absence of treatment. Here, we outline a genome-based targeting approach to long-lasting tumor growth inhibition with potential applicability to many other oncogenic drivers that are currently refractory to drug design.. With the recent comprehensive mapping of cancer genomes, there is now a need for functional approaches to edit the aberrant epigenetic state of key cancer drivers to reprogram the epi-pathology of the disease. In this study we utilized a programmable DNA-binding methyltransferase to induce targeted incorporation of DNA methylation (DNAme) in the SOX2 oncogene in breast cancer through a six zinc finger (ZF) protein linked to DNA methyltransferase 3A (ZF-DNMT3A). We demonstrated long-lasting oncogenic repression, which was maintained even after suppression of ZF-DNMT3A expression in tumor cells. The de novo DNAme was faithfully propagated and maintained through cell generations even after the suppression of the expression of the chimeric methyltransferase in the tumor cells. Xenograft studies in NUDE mice demonstrated stable SOX2 repression and long-term breast tumor growth inhibition, which lasted for >100 days post implantation of the tumor cells in mice. This was accompanied with a faithful maintenance of DNAme in the breast cancer implants. In contrast, downregulation of SOX2 by ZF domains engineered with the Krueppel-associated box repressor domain resulted in a transient and reversible suppression of oncogenic gene expression. Our results indicated that targeted de novo DNAme of the SOX2 oncogenic promoter was sufficient to induce long-lasting epigenetic silencing, which was not only maintained during cell division but also significantly delayed the tumorigenic phenotype of cancer cells in vivo, even in the absence of treatment. Here, we outline a genome-based targeting approach to long-lasting tumor growth inhibition with potential applicability to many other oncogenic drivers that are currently refractory to drug design.

. 
Expression of oestrogen receptor (ESR1) determines whether a breast cancer patient receives endocrine therapy, but does not guarantee patient response. The molecular factors that define endocrine response in ESR1-positive breast cancer patients remain poorly understood. Here we characterize the DNA methylome of endocrine sensitivity and demonstrate the potential impact of differential DNA methylation on endocrine response in breast cancer. We show that DNA hypermethylation occurs predominantly at oestrogen-responsive enhancers and is associated with reduced ESR1 binding and decreased gene expression of key regulators of ESR1 activity, thus providing a novel mechanism by which endocrine response is abated in ESR1-positive breast cancers. Conversely, we delineate that ESR1-responsive enhancer hypomethylation is critical in transition from normal mammary epithelial cells to endocrine-responsive ESR1-positive cancer. Cumulatively, these novel insights highlight the potential of ESR1-responsive enhancer methylation to both predict ESR1-positive disease and stratify ESR1-positive breast cancer patients as responders to endocrine therapy.. Expression of oestrogen receptor (ESR1) determines whether a breast cancer patient receives endocrine therapy, but does not guarantee patient response. The molecular factors that define endocrine response in ESR1-positive breast cancer patients remain poorly understood. Here we characterize the DNA methylome of endocrine sensitivity and demonstrate the potential impact of differential DNA methylation on endocrine response in breast cancer. We show that DNA hypermethylation occurs predominantly at oestrogen-responsive enhancers and is associated with reduced ESR1 binding and decreased gene expression of key regulators of ESR1 activity, thus providing a novel mechanism by which endocrine response is abated in ESR1-positive breast cancers. Conversely, we delineate that ESR1-responsive enhancer hypomethylation is critical in transition from normal mammary epithelial cells to endocrine-responsive ESR1-positive cancer. Cumulatively, these novel insights highlight the potential of ESR1-responsive enhancer methylation to both predict ESR1-positive disease and stratify ESR1-positive breast cancer patients as responders to endocrine therapy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer among women worldwide. The aberrant promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a typical epigenetic alteration for breast cancer and can be detected in early carcinogenesis. High-throughput and cost-effective methods are needed for the early and sensitive detection of epigenetic changes in clinical material. The main purpose of our study was to optimize a high-resolution melting (HRM) assay for the reliable and quantitative assessment of RASSF1 gene methylation, which is considered one of the earliest epigenetic alterations in breast cancer. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 76 breast carcinomas and 10 noncancerous breast tissues were studied by means of HRM and compared with the results obtained by means of quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) and methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). RESULTS: Both quantitative methods, HRM and QMSP, showed a similar specificity and sensitivity for the detection of RASSF1 methylation in breast cancer (about 80% and 70%, respectively). In breast cancer, the mean methylation intensity of RASSF1 was 42.5% and 48.6% according to HRM and QMSP, respectively. Both methods detected low levels of methylation (less than 5%) in noncancerous breast tissues. In comparison with quantitative methods, MSP showed a lower sensitivity (70%), but a higher specificity (80%) for the detection of RASSF1 methylation in breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: HRM is as a simple, cost-effective method for the reliable high-throughput quantification of DNA methylation in clinical material.. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Breast cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer among women worldwide. The aberrant promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes is a typical epigenetic alteration for breast cancer and can be detected in early carcinogenesis. High-throughput and cost-effective methods are needed for the early and sensitive detection of epigenetic changes in clinical material. The main purpose of our study was to optimize a high-resolution melting (HRM) assay for the reliable and quantitative assessment of RASSF1 gene methylation, which is considered one of the earliest epigenetic alterations in breast cancer. MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 76 breast carcinomas and 10 noncancerous breast tissues were studied by means of HRM and compared with the results obtained by means of quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) and methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). RESULTS: Both quantitative methods, HRM and QMSP, showed a similar specificity and sensitivity for the detection of RASSF1 methylation in breast cancer (about 80% and 70%, respectively). In breast cancer, the mean methylation intensity of RASSF1 was 42.5% and 48.6% according to HRM and QMSP, respectively. Both methods detected low levels of methylation (less than 5%) in noncancerous breast tissues. In comparison with quantitative methods, MSP showed a lower sensitivity (70%), but a higher specificity (80%) for the detection of RASSF1 methylation in breast cancer. CONCLUSIONS: HRM is as a simple, cost-effective method for the reliable high-throughput quantification of DNA methylation in clinical material.

BACKGROUND: The extent to which white blood cell (WBC) DNA methylation provides information on the status of breast epithelial cell DNA is unknown. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined the correlation between methylation in Ras-association domain family-1 gene (RASSF1), a tumor-suppressor gene, and methylation in repetitive elements in paired sets of DNA from WBC and breast epithelial cells collected from 32 women undergoing reduction mammoplasty. RESULTS: We observed no evidence of correlation in methylation levels for ALU, long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE1) or juxtacentromeric satellite-2 (SAT2) (r=0.02 for LINE1, p=0.98; r=0.28 for ALU, p=0.12; r=0.26 for SAT2, p=0.17) for matched sets of DNA from WBC and breast epithelial cells. Variability in these markers across individuals and in the same tissue was low. Five women had an average methylation level above 5% for RASSF1 in breast epithelial cell DNA; however, average methylation levels in WBC DNA for these women were all below 1%. CONCLUSION: Methylation patterns in WBC DNA did not reflect methylation patterns in the breast.. BACKGROUND: The extent to which white blood cell (WBC) DNA methylation provides information on the status of breast epithelial cell DNA is unknown. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined the correlation between methylation in Ras-association domain family-1 gene (RASSF1), a tumor-suppressor gene, and methylation in repetitive elements in paired sets of DNA from WBC and breast epithelial cells collected from 32 women undergoing reduction mammoplasty. RESULTS: We observed no evidence of correlation in methylation levels for ALU, long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE1) or juxtacentromeric satellite-2 (SAT2) (r=0.02 for LINE1, p=0.98; r=0.28 for ALU, p=0.12; r=0.26 for SAT2, p=0.17) for matched sets of DNA from WBC and breast epithelial cells. Variability in these markers across individuals and in the same tissue was low. Five women had an average methylation level above 5% for RASSF1 in breast epithelial cell DNA; however, average methylation levels in WBC DNA for these women were all below 1%. CONCLUSION: Methylation patterns in WBC DNA did not reflect methylation patterns in the breast.

Tumors are capable of shedding DNA into the blood stream. This shed DNA may be recovered from serum or plasma. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether pyrosequencing promoter DNA in a panel of 12 breast cancer-related genes (APC, BRCA1, CCND2, CDH1, ESR1, GSTP1, HIN1, P16, RARbeta, RASSF1, SFRP1 and TWIST) to measure the degree of methylation would lead to a useful serum-based marker of breast cancer. Serum was obtained from women who were about to undergo a breast biopsy or mastectomy at three hospitals from 1977 to 1987 in Grand Rapids, MI USA. We compared the methylation status of 12 genes in serum DNA obtained from three groups of postmenopausal women (mean age at blood collection: 63.0 y; SD 9.9; range 35-91): breast cancer cases with lymph node-positive disease (n = 241); breast cancer cases with lymph node-negative disease (n = 63); and benign breast disease control subjects (n = 234). Overall, median levels of promoter methylation were low, typically below 5%, for all genes in all study groups. For all genes, median levels of methylation were higher (by 3.3 to 47.6%) in lymph node-positive breast cancer cases than in the controls. Comparing mean methylation level between lymph-node positive cases and controls, the most statistically significant findings, after adjustment of the false-positive rate (q-value), were for TWIST (p = 0.04), SFRP1 (p = 0.16), ESR1 (p = 0.17), P16 (p = 0.19) and APC (p = 0.19). For two of these four genes (TWIST, P16), the median methylation level was also highest in lymph-node positive cases, intermediate in lymph node-negative cases and lowest in the controls. The percent of study subjects with mean methylation scores >/= 5% was higher among lymph node-positive cases than controls for ten genes, and significantly higher for HIN1 and TWIST (22.0 vs. 12.2%, p = 0.04 and 37.9 vs. 24.5%, p = 0.004, respectively). Despite relatively consistent variation in methylation patterns among groups, these modest differences did not provide sufficient ability to distinguish between cases and controls in a clinical setting.. Tumors are capable of shedding DNA into the blood stream. This shed DNA may be recovered from serum or plasma. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether pyrosequencing promoter DNA in a panel of 12 breast cancer-related genes (APC, BRCA1, CCND2, CDH1, ESR1, GSTP1, HIN1, P16, RARbeta, RASSF1, SFRP1 and TWIST) to measure the degree of methylation would lead to a useful serum-based marker of breast cancer. Serum was obtained from women who were about to undergo a breast biopsy or mastectomy at three hospitals from 1977 to 1987 in Grand Rapids, MI USA. We compared the methylation status of 12 genes in serum DNA obtained from three groups of postmenopausal women (mean age at blood collection: 63.0 y; SD 9.9; range 35-91): breast cancer cases with lymph node-positive disease (n = 241); breast cancer cases with lymph node-negative disease (n = 63); and benign breast disease control subjects (n = 234). Overall, median levels of promoter methylation were low, typically below 5%, for all genes in all study groups. For all genes, median levels of methylation were higher (by 3.3 to 47.6%) in lymph node-positive breast cancer cases than in the controls. Comparing mean methylation level between lymph-node positive cases and controls, the most statistically significant findings, after adjustment of the false-positive rate (q-value), were for TWIST (p = 0.04), SFRP1 (p = 0.16), ESR1 (p = 0.17), P16 (p = 0.19) and APC (p = 0.19). For two of these four genes (TWIST, P16), the median methylation level was also highest in lymph-node positive cases, intermediate in lymph node-negative cases and lowest in the controls. The percent of study subjects with mean methylation scores >/= 5% was higher among lymph node-positive cases than controls for ten genes, and significantly higher for HIN1 and TWIST (22.0 vs. 12.2%, p = 0.04 and 37.9 vs. 24.5%, p = 0.004, respectively). Despite relatively consistent variation in methylation patterns among groups, these modest differences did not provide sufficient ability to distinguish between cases and controls in a clinical setting.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have suggested that global DNA methylation in circulating white blood cells (WBC) is associated with breast cancer risk. METHODS: To address conflicting results and concerns that the findings for WBC DNA methylation in some prior studies may reflect disease effects, we evaluated the relationship between global levels of WBC DNA methylation in white blood cells and breast cancer risk in a case-control study nested within the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO) cohort. A total of 428 invasive breast cancer cases and 419 controls, frequency matched on age at entry (55-59, 60-64, 65-69, >/=70 years), year of entry (on/before September 30, 1997, on/after October 1, 1997) and period of DNA extraction (previously extracted, newly extracted) were included. The ratio of 5-methyl-2' deoxycytidine [5-mdC] to 2'-deoxyguanine [dG], assuming [dG] = [5-mdC] + [2'-deoxycytidine [dC]] (%5-mdC), was determined by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry, an especially accurate method for assessing total genomic DNA methylation. RESULTS: Odds ratio (OR) estimates and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for breast cancer risk adjusted for age at entry, year of entry, and period of DNA extraction, were 1.0 (referent), 0.89 (95% CI, 0.6-1.3), 0.88 (95% CI, 0.6-1.3), and 0.84 (95% CI, 0.6-1.2) for women in the highest compared to lowest quartile levels of %5md-C (p for trend = .39). Effects did not meaningfully vary by time elapsed from WBC collection to diagnosis. DISCUSSION: These results do not support the hypothesis that global DNA hypomethylation in WBC DNA is associated with increased breast cancer risk prior to the appearance of clinical disease.. BACKGROUND: Several studies have suggested that global DNA methylation in circulating white blood cells (WBC) is associated with breast cancer risk. METHODS: To address conflicting results and concerns that the findings for WBC DNA methylation in some prior studies may reflect disease effects, we evaluated the relationship between global levels of WBC DNA methylation in white blood cells and breast cancer risk in a case-control study nested within the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO) cohort. A total of 428 invasive breast cancer cases and 419 controls, frequency matched on age at entry (55-59, 60-64, 65-69, >/=70 years), year of entry (on/before September 30, 1997, on/after October 1, 1997) and period of DNA extraction (previously extracted, newly extracted) were included. The ratio of 5-methyl-2' deoxycytidine [5-mdC] to 2'-deoxyguanine [dG], assuming [dG] = [5-mdC] + [2'-deoxycytidine [dC]] (%5-mdC), was determined by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry, an especially accurate method for assessing total genomic DNA methylation. RESULTS: Odds ratio (OR) estimates and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for breast cancer risk adjusted for age at entry, year of entry, and period of DNA extraction, were 1.0 (referent), 0.89 (95% CI, 0.6-1.3), 0.88 (95% CI, 0.6-1.3), and 0.84 (95% CI, 0.6-1.2) for women in the highest compared to lowest quartile levels of %5md-C (p for trend = .39). Effects did not meaningfully vary by time elapsed from WBC collection to diagnosis. DISCUSSION: These results do not support the hypothesis that global DNA hypomethylation in WBC DNA is associated with increased breast cancer risk prior to the appearance of clinical disease.

Limonin has been shown to exert anti-inflammatory effects, however, its roles in tumor progression remain unclear. This work aims to investigate the roles and related mechanism of limonin in the stemness of breast cancer cells. Here, we found that limonin attenuated the stemness of breast cancer cells in a concentration-dependent manner, evident by the decreasing the capacity of cell spheroid formation, expression of stemness markers and ALDH1 activity, whereas had no toxicity on non-tumorigenic cells. Additionally, limonin enhanced adriamycin sensitivity of breast cancer cells and attenuated adriamycin resistance in adriamycin-resistant breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, limonin decreased MIR216A methylation level and thus increased miR-216a-3p expression. Furthermore, miR-216a-3p could directly bind to WNT3A and thus inactivated Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Therefore, our results indicate that limonin could attenuate the stemness and chemoresistance via inhibiting MIR216A methylation and subsequently suppressing Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.. Limonin has been shown to exert anti-inflammatory effects, however, its roles in tumor progression remain unclear. This work aims to investigate the roles and related mechanism of limonin in the stemness of breast cancer cells. Here, we found that limonin attenuated the stemness of breast cancer cells in a concentration-dependent manner, evident by the decreasing the capacity of cell spheroid formation, expression of stemness markers and ALDH1 activity, whereas had no toxicity on non-tumorigenic cells. Additionally, limonin enhanced adriamycin sensitivity of breast cancer cells and attenuated adriamycin resistance in adriamycin-resistant breast cancer cells. Mechanistically, limonin decreased MIR216A methylation level and thus increased miR-216a-3p expression. Furthermore, miR-216a-3p could directly bind to WNT3A and thus inactivated Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Therefore, our results indicate that limonin could attenuate the stemness and chemoresistance via inhibiting MIR216A methylation and subsequently suppressing Wnt/beta-catenin pathway.

BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation is a common epigenetic mechanism to silence tumor suppressor genes during breast cancer development. We investigated whether BRCA1-associated breast tumors show cancer-predictive methylation patterns similar to those found in sporadic tumors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR of 11 genes involved in breast carcinogenesis (RARB, RASSF1, TWIST1, CCND2, ESR1, SCGB3A1, BRCA1, BRCA2, CDKN2A, APC, CDH1) was carried out on 32 BRCA1-associated and 46 sporadic breast carcinomas and on normal breast tissue from seven BRCA1 mutation carriers and 13 non-carriers. RESULTS: The extent of cumulative methylation increased with age (P < 0.001). The median cumulative methylation index (CMI) of all studied genes was significantly higher in tumors (89) than in normal tissue (13, P < 0.001). The median CMI was significantly lower in BRCA1-associated (59) than in sporadic breast tumors (122, P = 0.001), in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors (73) than in ER-positive tumors (122, P = 0.005) and in lymph node-negative (77) compared with lymph node-positive tumors (137, P = 0.007). In subgroup analysis, the effect of a BRCA1 germline mutation on methylation proved to be independent of ER status, lymph node status and age. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that BRCA1-associated breast cancers show less promoter methylation compared with sporadic breast carcinomas indicating a difference in disease etiology.. BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation is a common epigenetic mechanism to silence tumor suppressor genes during breast cancer development. We investigated whether BRCA1-associated breast tumors show cancer-predictive methylation patterns similar to those found in sporadic tumors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR of 11 genes involved in breast carcinogenesis (RARB, RASSF1, TWIST1, CCND2, ESR1, SCGB3A1, BRCA1, BRCA2, CDKN2A, APC, CDH1) was carried out on 32 BRCA1-associated and 46 sporadic breast carcinomas and on normal breast tissue from seven BRCA1 mutation carriers and 13 non-carriers. RESULTS: The extent of cumulative methylation increased with age (P < 0.001). The median cumulative methylation index (CMI) of all studied genes was significantly higher in tumors (89) than in normal tissue (13, P < 0.001). The median CMI was significantly lower in BRCA1-associated (59) than in sporadic breast tumors (122, P = 0.001), in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors (73) than in ER-positive tumors (122, P = 0.005) and in lymph node-negative (77) compared with lymph node-positive tumors (137, P = 0.007). In subgroup analysis, the effect of a BRCA1 germline mutation on methylation proved to be independent of ER status, lymph node status and age. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that BRCA1-associated breast cancers show less promoter methylation compared with sporadic breast carcinomas indicating a difference in disease etiology.

BACKGROUND: Promoter hypermethylation has emerged as a promising cancer biomarker. Currently, a large variety of quantitative and non-quantitative techniques is used to measure methylation in clinical specimens. Here we directly compared three commonly used methylation assays and assessed the influence of tissue fixation, target sequence location and the amount of DNA on their performance. METHODS: We used Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP), Quantitative Multiplex MSP (QM-MSP) and Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) to compare methylation of CCND2, SCGB3A1, RARB and RASSF1 on DNA from 40 breast carcinomas. RESULTS: A comparison between MSP and QM-MSP on the same samples showed a high discrepancy: 20% of tumors that showed no methylation in MSP gave >10% methylation in QM-MSP. In contrast, QM-MSP correlated strongly with MS-MLPA when targeting the same sequence in DNA from paraffin embedded as well as fresh frozen tissue. This correlation declined when target sequences were non-overlapping. In titration experiments, MSP and MS-MLPA performed robust with 10 ng of DNA, while QM-MSP was at least ten-fold more sensitive. CONCLUSION: Despite the difference in molecular basis, QM-MSP and MS-MLPA showed moderate to strong correlations. In contrast, there was a poor concordance between either of these techniques and non-quantitative MSP. For biological samples with scarce DNA, QM-MSP is the method of choice.. BACKGROUND: Promoter hypermethylation has emerged as a promising cancer biomarker. Currently, a large variety of quantitative and non-quantitative techniques is used to measure methylation in clinical specimens. Here we directly compared three commonly used methylation assays and assessed the influence of tissue fixation, target sequence location and the amount of DNA on their performance. METHODS: We used Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP), Quantitative Multiplex MSP (QM-MSP) and Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) to compare methylation of CCND2, SCGB3A1, RARB and RASSF1 on DNA from 40 breast carcinomas. RESULTS: A comparison between MSP and QM-MSP on the same samples showed a high discrepancy: 20% of tumors that showed no methylation in MSP gave >10% methylation in QM-MSP. In contrast, QM-MSP correlated strongly with MS-MLPA when targeting the same sequence in DNA from paraffin embedded as well as fresh frozen tissue. This correlation declined when target sequences were non-overlapping. In titration experiments, MSP and MS-MLPA performed robust with 10 ng of DNA, while QM-MSP was at least ten-fold more sensitive. CONCLUSION: Despite the difference in molecular basis, QM-MSP and MS-MLPA showed moderate to strong correlations. In contrast, there was a poor concordance between either of these techniques and non-quantitative MSP. For biological samples with scarce DNA, QM-MSP is the method of choice.

The need for additional breast cancer screening tools is indisputably high, as one may conclude from the high rate of interval malignancies in women undergoing regular screening. DNA promoter methylation frequently occurs during breast carcinogenesis and is an early event in this process. Moreover, a field defect for methylation has been described and methylation values can reliably be assessed in limited amounts of DNA. Simultaneous detection of methylation of a panel of genes in breast fluids and/or blood derivatives could be both sufficiently specific and sensitive to be of additive value to current imaging-based screening methods. This review describes the recent developments in methylation detection in breast fluids, serum and plasma that paved the way for large prospective studies. These studies will provide us with the definite answer as to what will be the additive value of defining the methylation status of specific genes to current imaging-based screening methods.. The need for additional breast cancer screening tools is indisputably high, as one may conclude from the high rate of interval malignancies in women undergoing regular screening. DNA promoter methylation frequently occurs during breast carcinogenesis and is an early event in this process. Moreover, a field defect for methylation has been described and methylation values can reliably be assessed in limited amounts of DNA. Simultaneous detection of methylation of a panel of genes in breast fluids and/or blood derivatives could be both sufficiently specific and sensitive to be of additive value to current imaging-based screening methods. This review describes the recent developments in methylation detection in breast fluids, serum and plasma that paved the way for large prospective studies. These studies will provide us with the definite answer as to what will be the additive value of defining the methylation status of specific genes to current imaging-based screening methods.

Epigenetic changes have major role in the normal development and programming of gene expression. Aberrant methylation results in carcinogenesis. The primary objective of our study is to determine whether primary tumor tissue and cultured tumor cells in 2D and 3D tissue culture systems have the same methylation signature for PAX5, TMPRSS2, and SBDS. These findings will play an important role in developing in vitro model system to understand the effect of methylation inhibitors on primary tumor tissue. In a previous study PAX5, TMPRSS2, and SBDS genes that we are investigating were reported to be methylated more than 60% in breast cancer and malignant melanoma cell lines. However, these genes have never been studied in primary tumor tissues. Thus, primary tumor tissues of breast cancer and malignant melanoma were first grown in 2D and 3D cultures. Then these two types of tumor tissues and their 2D and 3D cultures were investigated for changes considering methylation levels in PAX5, TMPRSS2, and SBDS genes using real-time polymerase chain reaction. No differences were observed in the primary tissues and culture systems for both PAX5 and TMPRSS2 in malignant melanoma tissues. We found that PAX5 gene was an efficient marker to measure the effects of methylation inhibitors for in vitro systems for malignant melanoma tissue.. Epigenetic changes have major role in the normal development and programming of gene expression. Aberrant methylation results in carcinogenesis. The primary objective of our study is to determine whether primary tumor tissue and cultured tumor cells in 2D and 3D tissue culture systems have the same methylation signature for PAX5, TMPRSS2, and SBDS. These findings will play an important role in developing in vitro model system to understand the effect of methylation inhibitors on primary tumor tissue. In a previous study PAX5, TMPRSS2, and SBDS genes that we are investigating were reported to be methylated more than 60% in breast cancer and malignant melanoma cell lines. However, these genes have never been studied in primary tumor tissues. Thus, primary tumor tissues of breast cancer and malignant melanoma were first grown in 2D and 3D cultures. Then these two types of tumor tissues and their 2D and 3D cultures were investigated for changes considering methylation levels in PAX5, TMPRSS2, and SBDS genes using real-time polymerase chain reaction. No differences were observed in the primary tissues and culture systems for both PAX5 and TMPRSS2 in malignant melanoma tissues. We found that PAX5 gene was an efficient marker to measure the effects of methylation inhibitors for in vitro systems for malignant melanoma tissue.

This study is to explore the roles of gene methylation of Notch1 and JAG1 in development of invasive ductal carcinoma of breast. Quantitative analysis the DNA methylation levels of Notch1 and JAG1 gene by the MassARRAY method in invasive ductal carcinoma of breast (IDC; n = 89), atypical ductal hyperplasia of breast (ADH; n = 11), and ordinary ductal hyperplasia of breast (UDH; n = 20). The expressions of JAG1 and Notch1 protein in four breast tissues were detected by immunohistochemistry SP method. (1) Positive expression rates of Notch1 protein in IDC and DCIS were 88.7 % (79/89) and 70.0 % (14/20), respectively, which were significantly higher than the levels in ADH (36.0 %, 4/11) and UDH (25.0 %, 5/20; P < 0.05). Notch1 protein expression was significant positively correlated with lymph node metastasis, pathological grades, and TNM stages of IDC. (2) Positive expression rates of JAG1 protein in IDC and DCIS were 89.9 % (80/89) and 75.0 % (15/20), respectively, which were significantly higher than those of ADH (45.0 %, 5/11) and UDH (30.0 %, 6/20; P < 0.05). JAG1 protein expression was significant positive correlation with lymph node metastasis, pathological grades and TNM stages of IDC. There is an overall hypomethylation alteration of Notch1 and JAG gene in IDC, with corresponding over-expression of Notch1 and JAG1 protein. This inverse correlation shows that the alteration of protein expression results from hypomethylation oncogene Notch1 and JAG1, and this change may play an important role in occurrence and progression of breast cancer.. This study is to explore the roles of gene methylation of Notch1 and JAG1 in development of invasive ductal carcinoma of breast. Quantitative analysis the DNA methylation levels of Notch1 and JAG1 gene by the MassARRAY method in invasive ductal carcinoma of breast (IDC; n = 89), atypical ductal hyperplasia of breast (ADH; n = 11), and ordinary ductal hyperplasia of breast (UDH; n = 20). The expressions of JAG1 and Notch1 protein in four breast tissues were detected by immunohistochemistry SP method. (1) Positive expression rates of Notch1 protein in IDC and DCIS were 88.7 % (79/89) and 70.0 % (14/20), respectively, which were significantly higher than the levels in ADH (36.0 %, 4/11) and UDH (25.0 %, 5/20; P < 0.05). Notch1 protein expression was significant positively correlated with lymph node metastasis, pathological grades, and TNM stages of IDC. (2) Positive expression rates of JAG1 protein in IDC and DCIS were 89.9 % (80/89) and 75.0 % (15/20), respectively, which were significantly higher than those of ADH (45.0 %, 5/11) and UDH (30.0 %, 6/20; P < 0.05). JAG1 protein expression was significant positive correlation with lymph node metastasis, pathological grades and TNM stages of IDC. There is an overall hypomethylation alteration of Notch1 and JAG gene in IDC, with corresponding over-expression of Notch1 and JAG1 protein. This inverse correlation shows that the alteration of protein expression results from hypomethylation oncogene Notch1 and JAG1, and this change may play an important role in occurrence and progression of breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the different expressions of ER and ER gene status between primary and relapsed/metastatic lesions and their clinical significance. METHODS: ER and ER gene status of primary and relapse/metastatic breast cancer masked in 70 metastatic breast cancer patients were assessed by determination of methylation status by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP), respectively. RESULTS: Positive rate of ER in the primary breast cancers was 64.3%, and in the relapse/metastatic lesions was 41.4% (P < 0.05). There were six patients whose positive ER status was changed to negative, among them the ER gene status was changed from demethylation to hypermethylation in four cases. Another four patients with negative ER status changed to positive, and their ER gene hypermethylation changed to ER demethylation status. CONCLUSIONS: The discordance of ER expression status in primary and relapse/metastatic lesions of breast cancer might be related to DNA methylation status.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the different expressions of ER and ER gene status between primary and relapsed/metastatic lesions and their clinical significance. METHODS: ER and ER gene status of primary and relapse/metastatic breast cancer masked in 70 metastatic breast cancer patients were assessed by determination of methylation status by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP), respectively. RESULTS: Positive rate of ER in the primary breast cancers was 64.3%, and in the relapse/metastatic lesions was 41.4% (P < 0.05). There were six patients whose positive ER status was changed to negative, among them the ER gene status was changed from demethylation to hypermethylation in four cases. Another four patients with negative ER status changed to positive, and their ER gene hypermethylation changed to ER demethylation status. CONCLUSIONS: The discordance of ER expression status in primary and relapse/metastatic lesions of breast cancer might be related to DNA methylation status.

Aim of Study: The current meta-analysis investigated the correlation between breast cancer type 1 (BRCA1) promoter methylation and the clinicopathological features of breast cancer (BC). Materials and Methods: An electronic literature search was performed to identify and select cohort studies, by employing stringent inclusion and exclusion criteria, for data relevant to promoter methylation of BRCA1 and BC. Statistical analysis of the extracted data was performed using comprehensive meta-analysis 2.0 software (CMA 2.0) (Biostat Inc., Englewood, New Jersey, USA). Results: A total of 125 published studies were retrieved from the literature search, and finally, 18 cohort studies meeting our inclusion criteria were incorporated into our meta-analysis. The 18 studies contained a total of 3213 BC patients. Meta-analysis results revealed that BRCA1 promoter methylation in BC patients with high and moderately differentiated tumors (I-II) was significantly lower than patients with poorly-differentiation tumors (III) (odds ratio [OR] =0.450, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] =0.241-0.838, P = 0.012). BRCA1 promoter methylation in BC patients with lymph node (LN) metastasis was significantly higher than patients without LN metastasis (OR = 2.244, 95% CI = 1.278-3.940, P = 0.005). The results of ethnicity-based subgroup analysis showed a significant difference in histological grade of BC on Asians, LN metastasis of BC in Asians and Caucasians, subtypes of BC in Caucasians, and age at diagnosis of BC patients in Caucasians (all P < 0.05). Conclusions: Our meta-analysis revealed that BRCA1 promoter methylation status is linked to tumor grade and LN metastasis of BC.. Aim of Study: The current meta-analysis investigated the correlation between breast cancer type 1 (BRCA1) promoter methylation and the clinicopathological features of breast cancer (BC). Materials and Methods: An electronic literature search was performed to identify and select cohort studies, by employing stringent inclusion and exclusion criteria, for data relevant to promoter methylation of BRCA1 and BC. Statistical analysis of the extracted data was performed using comprehensive meta-analysis 2.0 software (CMA 2.0) (Biostat Inc., Englewood, New Jersey, USA). Results: A total of 125 published studies were retrieved from the literature search, and finally, 18 cohort studies meeting our inclusion criteria were incorporated into our meta-analysis. The 18 studies contained a total of 3213 BC patients. Meta-analysis results revealed that BRCA1 promoter methylation in BC patients with high and moderately differentiated tumors (I-II) was significantly lower than patients with poorly-differentiation tumors (III) (odds ratio [OR] =0.450, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] =0.241-0.838, P = 0.012). BRCA1 promoter methylation in BC patients with lymph node (LN) metastasis was significantly higher than patients without LN metastasis (OR = 2.244, 95% CI = 1.278-3.940, P = 0.005). The results of ethnicity-based subgroup analysis showed a significant difference in histological grade of BC on Asians, LN metastasis of BC in Asians and Caucasians, subtypes of BC in Caucasians, and age at diagnosis of BC patients in Caucasians (all P < 0.05). Conclusions: Our meta-analysis revealed that BRCA1 promoter methylation status is linked to tumor grade and LN metastasis of BC.

We used deep sequencing technology to profile the transcriptome, gene copy number, and CpG island methylation status simultaneously in eight commonly used breast cell lines to develop a model for how these genomic features are integrated in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and negative breast cancer. Total mRNA sequence, gene copy number, and genomic CpG island methylation were carried out using the Illumina Genome Analyzer. Sequences were mapped to the human genome to obtain digitized gene expression data, DNA copy number in reference to the non-tumor cell line (MCF10A), and methylation status of 21,570 CpG islands to identify differentially expressed genes that were correlated with methylation or copy number changes. These were evaluated in a dataset from 129 primary breast tumors. Gene expression in cell lines was dominated by ER-associated genes. ER+ and ER- cell lines formed two distinct, stable clusters, and 1,873 genes were differentially expressed in the two groups. Part of chromosome 8 was deleted in all ER- cells and part of chromosome 17 amplified in all ER+ cells. These loci encoded 30 genes that were overexpressed in ER+ cells; 9 of these genes were overexpressed in ER+ tumors. We identified 149 differentially expressed genes that exhibited differential methylation of one or more CpG islands within 5 kb of the 5' end of the gene and for which mRNA abundance was inversely correlated with CpG island methylation status. In primary tumors we identified 84 genes that appear to be robust components of the methylation signature that we identified in ER+ cell lines. Our analyses reveal a global pattern of differential CpG island methylation that contributes to the transcriptome landscape of ER+ and ER- breast cancer cells and tumors. The role of gene amplification/deletion appears to more modest, although several potentially significant genes appear to be regulated by copy number aberrations.. We used deep sequencing technology to profile the transcriptome, gene copy number, and CpG island methylation status simultaneously in eight commonly used breast cell lines to develop a model for how these genomic features are integrated in estrogen receptor positive (ER+) and negative breast cancer. Total mRNA sequence, gene copy number, and genomic CpG island methylation were carried out using the Illumina Genome Analyzer. Sequences were mapped to the human genome to obtain digitized gene expression data, DNA copy number in reference to the non-tumor cell line (MCF10A), and methylation status of 21,570 CpG islands to identify differentially expressed genes that were correlated with methylation or copy number changes. These were evaluated in a dataset from 129 primary breast tumors. Gene expression in cell lines was dominated by ER-associated genes. ER+ and ER- cell lines formed two distinct, stable clusters, and 1,873 genes were differentially expressed in the two groups. Part of chromosome 8 was deleted in all ER- cells and part of chromosome 17 amplified in all ER+ cells. These loci encoded 30 genes that were overexpressed in ER+ cells; 9 of these genes were overexpressed in ER+ tumors. We identified 149 differentially expressed genes that exhibited differential methylation of one or more CpG islands within 5 kb of the 5' end of the gene and for which mRNA abundance was inversely correlated with CpG island methylation status. In primary tumors we identified 84 genes that appear to be robust components of the methylation signature that we identified in ER+ cell lines. Our analyses reveal a global pattern of differential CpG island methylation that contributes to the transcriptome landscape of ER+ and ER- breast cancer cells and tumors. The role of gene amplification/deletion appears to more modest, although several potentially significant genes appear to be regulated by copy number aberrations.

BACKGROUND: RRAD, a small Ras-related GTPase, is highly expressed in human skeletal muscle, lung, and heart. Although loss of expression of RRAD in breast cancer cells has been reported and it may act as an oncogene, the mechanism of silencing is unknown. METHODS: We examined (1) mRNA expression of RRAD in lung and breast cancer cell lines using RT-PCR and (2) methylation status of lung and breast cancers. RESULTS: Loss of RRAD expression was found in 14 of 20 (70%) NSCLC cell lines, 11 of 11 (100%) SCLC cell lines, and 8 of 10 (80%) breast cancer cell lines; expression was not affected in normal bronchial and mammary epithelial cells. Treatment of 23 expression-negative cell lines with a demethylating agent restored expression in all cases. We developed a methylation-specific assay from the analysis of bisulfite sequencing of the 5' region of RRAD in expression-negative and positive cell lines, which resulted in good concordance between methylation and expression. Primary lung and breast cancers showed hypermethylation in 89 of 214 (42%) and 39 of 63 (62%) cases, respectively. RRAD hypermethylation correlated with smoking history and poorer prognosis in lung adenocarcinomas. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that epigenetic silencing of RRAD is a frequent event in lung and breast cancers, and analysis of it may provide novel opportunities for prognosis and therapy of these cancers.. BACKGROUND: RRAD, a small Ras-related GTPase, is highly expressed in human skeletal muscle, lung, and heart. Although loss of expression of RRAD in breast cancer cells has been reported and it may act as an oncogene, the mechanism of silencing is unknown. METHODS: We examined (1) mRNA expression of RRAD in lung and breast cancer cell lines using RT-PCR and (2) methylation status of lung and breast cancers. RESULTS: Loss of RRAD expression was found in 14 of 20 (70%) NSCLC cell lines, 11 of 11 (100%) SCLC cell lines, and 8 of 10 (80%) breast cancer cell lines; expression was not affected in normal bronchial and mammary epithelial cells. Treatment of 23 expression-negative cell lines with a demethylating agent restored expression in all cases. We developed a methylation-specific assay from the analysis of bisulfite sequencing of the 5' region of RRAD in expression-negative and positive cell lines, which resulted in good concordance between methylation and expression. Primary lung and breast cancers showed hypermethylation in 89 of 214 (42%) and 39 of 63 (62%) cases, respectively. RRAD hypermethylation correlated with smoking history and poorer prognosis in lung adenocarcinomas. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that epigenetic silencing of RRAD is a frequent event in lung and breast cancers, and analysis of it may provide novel opportunities for prognosis and therapy of these cancers.

Changes in the status of DNA methylation are one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia. We aimed to identify epigenetic molecular markers in serum for early detection of breast cancer. Authors analyzed retrospectively the methylation status of RARbeta2 and APC genes in serum samples from 121 breast cancer patients, 79 patients with benign breast diseases, and 66 healthy volunteers using methylation-specific PCR. The methylated APC and RARbeta2 were significantly higher in breast cancer patients (93.4%, 95.6%) than benign (7.8%, 14.5%) but not detected in healthy volunteers (0%) at (P < 0.0001). Both methylated genes showed no significant difference among clinicopathological factors apart from triple negative breast cancer patients as all of them (chi(2) = 7.4, P = 0.007) reported to be methylated RARbeta2 genes. Both methylated genes were detected in all grades and stages. Both sensitivities and specificities of the methylated genes for breast cancer detection were superior to traditional tumor markers in detection of breast cancer, early stage, low grade tumors, and triple negative breast cancer patients. Thus methylated APC and RARbeta2 genes might be valuable serum-based molecular markers for early detection of breast cancer.. Changes in the status of DNA methylation are one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia. We aimed to identify epigenetic molecular markers in serum for early detection of breast cancer. Authors analyzed retrospectively the methylation status of RARbeta2 and APC genes in serum samples from 121 breast cancer patients, 79 patients with benign breast diseases, and 66 healthy volunteers using methylation-specific PCR. The methylated APC and RARbeta2 were significantly higher in breast cancer patients (93.4%, 95.6%) than benign (7.8%, 14.5%) but not detected in healthy volunteers (0%) at (P < 0.0001). Both methylated genes showed no significant difference among clinicopathological factors apart from triple negative breast cancer patients as all of them (chi(2) = 7.4, P = 0.007) reported to be methylated RARbeta2 genes. Both methylated genes were detected in all grades and stages. Both sensitivities and specificities of the methylated genes for breast cancer detection were superior to traditional tumor markers in detection of breast cancer, early stage, low grade tumors, and triple negative breast cancer patients. Thus methylated APC and RARbeta2 genes might be valuable serum-based molecular markers for early detection of breast cancer.

Changes in gene expression that reset a cell program from a normal to a diseased state involve multiple genetic circuitries, creating a characteristic signature of gene expression that defines the cell's unique identity. Such signatures have been demonstrated to classify subtypes of breast cancers. Because DNA methylation is critical in programming gene expression, a change in methylation from a normal to diseased state should be similarly reflected in a signature of DNA methylation that involves multiple gene pathways. Whole-genome approaches have recently been used with different levels of success to delineate breast-cancer-specific DNA methylation signatures, and to test whether they can classify breast cancer and whether they could be associated with specific clinical outcomes. Recent work suggests that DNA methylation signatures will extend our ability to classify breast cancer and predict outcome beyond what is currently possible. DNA methylation is a robust biomarker, vastly more stable than RNA or proteins, and is therefore a promising target for the development of new approaches for diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer and other diseases. Here, I review the scientific basis for using DNA methylation signatures in breast cancer classification and prognosis. I discuss the role of DNA methylation in normal gene regulation, the aberrations in DNA methylation in cancer, and candidate-gene and whole-genome approaches to classify breast cancer subtypes using DNA methylation markers.. Changes in gene expression that reset a cell program from a normal to a diseased state involve multiple genetic circuitries, creating a characteristic signature of gene expression that defines the cell's unique identity. Such signatures have been demonstrated to classify subtypes of breast cancers. Because DNA methylation is critical in programming gene expression, a change in methylation from a normal to diseased state should be similarly reflected in a signature of DNA methylation that involves multiple gene pathways. Whole-genome approaches have recently been used with different levels of success to delineate breast-cancer-specific DNA methylation signatures, and to test whether they can classify breast cancer and whether they could be associated with specific clinical outcomes. Recent work suggests that DNA methylation signatures will extend our ability to classify breast cancer and predict outcome beyond what is currently possible. DNA methylation is a robust biomarker, vastly more stable than RNA or proteins, and is therefore a promising target for the development of new approaches for diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer and other diseases. Here, I review the scientific basis for using DNA methylation signatures in breast cancer classification and prognosis. I discuss the role of DNA methylation in normal gene regulation, the aberrations in DNA methylation in cancer, and candidate-gene and whole-genome approaches to classify breast cancer subtypes using DNA methylation markers.

DNA methylation and chromatin structure patterns are tightly linked components of the epigenome, which regulate gene expression programming. Two contradictory changes in DNA methylation patterns are observed in breast cancer; regional hypermethylation of specific genes and global hypomethylation. It is proposed here that independent mechanisms are responsible for these alterations in DNA methylation patterns and that these alterations deregulate two different processes in breast cancer. Regional hypermethylation is brought about by specific regional changes in chromatin structure, whereas global demethylation is caused by a general increase in demethylation activity. Hypermethylation silences growth regulatory genes resulting in uncontrolled growth whereas hypomethylation leads to activation of genes required for metastasis. DNA methylation inhibitors activate silenced tumor suppressor genes resulting in arrest of tumor growth and are now being tested as candidate anticancer drugs. Demethylation inhibitors are proposed here to be potential novel candidate antimetastatic agents, which would bring about methylation and silencing of metastatic genes. Future therapeutic application of either methylation or demethylation inhibitors in cancer therapy would require understanding of the relative role of these processes in the evolution of cancer.. DNA methylation and chromatin structure patterns are tightly linked components of the epigenome, which regulate gene expression programming. Two contradictory changes in DNA methylation patterns are observed in breast cancer; regional hypermethylation of specific genes and global hypomethylation. It is proposed here that independent mechanisms are responsible for these alterations in DNA methylation patterns and that these alterations deregulate two different processes in breast cancer. Regional hypermethylation is brought about by specific regional changes in chromatin structure, whereas global demethylation is caused by a general increase in demethylation activity. Hypermethylation silences growth regulatory genes resulting in uncontrolled growth whereas hypomethylation leads to activation of genes required for metastasis. DNA methylation inhibitors activate silenced tumor suppressor genes resulting in arrest of tumor growth and are now being tested as candidate anticancer drugs. Demethylation inhibitors are proposed here to be potential novel candidate antimetastatic agents, which would bring about methylation and silencing of metastatic genes. Future therapeutic application of either methylation or demethylation inhibitors in cancer therapy would require understanding of the relative role of these processes in the evolution of cancer.

Intercellular communication via gap junctions is a mechanism for tumor suppression. Connexin 26 (Cx26) is a structural component of gap junctions expressed by breast epithelial cells. Expression levels of Cx26 are reduced in many breast tumors. Methylation-sensitive single-stranded conformation analysis showed variable methylation in the promoter region CpG island in 11 out of 20 (55%) breast cancer patients. Heterogeneity in methylation patterns was observed both between and within tumors. The degree of methylation ranged from a few CpG dinucleotides to almost all the CpG dinucleotides in the analyzed region. The most frequently methylated CpG was in an Sp1 site known to be important for Cx26 gene expression. One of eight breast cancer cell lines (MD-MBA-453) was methylated in the promoter region and did not express Cx26. Treatment of MDA-MB-453 with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in the re-expression of Cx26 mRNA. Methylation of the promoter region is likely to be an important mechanism in modulating the expression of Cx26 in breast cancer.. Intercellular communication via gap junctions is a mechanism for tumor suppression. Connexin 26 (Cx26) is a structural component of gap junctions expressed by breast epithelial cells. Expression levels of Cx26 are reduced in many breast tumors. Methylation-sensitive single-stranded conformation analysis showed variable methylation in the promoter region CpG island in 11 out of 20 (55%) breast cancer patients. Heterogeneity in methylation patterns was observed both between and within tumors. The degree of methylation ranged from a few CpG dinucleotides to almost all the CpG dinucleotides in the analyzed region. The most frequently methylated CpG was in an Sp1 site known to be important for Cx26 gene expression. One of eight breast cancer cell lines (MD-MBA-453) was methylated in the promoter region and did not express Cx26. Treatment of MDA-MB-453 with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in the re-expression of Cx26 mRNA. Methylation of the promoter region is likely to be an important mechanism in modulating the expression of Cx26 in breast cancer.

BACKGROUND/AIM: We previously identified that promoter DNA methylation of cysteine dioxygenase type 1 (CDO1) and homeobox only protein homeobox (HOPX) were both cancer specific, and have a clinical potential as prognostic biomarkers in breast cancer (BC). The present study compared the differential prognostic relevance of methylation status of the CDO1 and HOPX genes in BC. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation levels (TaqMethVs) were quantified in 7 BC cell lines and 133 BC patients by TaqMan methylation-specific PCR and functional traits were explored for CDO1. RESULTS: TaqMethVs were associated between CDO1 and HOPX (r(2)=0.072, p=0.002). Multivariate Cox proportional hazards model could identify CDO1 hypermethylation as well as Ki-67 as independent prognostic factors related to disease-specific survival (p=0.016, p<0.001). Overexpression of CDO1 decreased the anchorage-independent growth capacity in BC cell lines. CONCLUSION: CDO1 is a definite tumor suppressor gene, while its prognostic relevance was more than expected in the context of its functional relevance.. BACKGROUND/AIM: We previously identified that promoter DNA methylation of cysteine dioxygenase type 1 (CDO1) and homeobox only protein homeobox (HOPX) were both cancer specific, and have a clinical potential as prognostic biomarkers in breast cancer (BC). The present study compared the differential prognostic relevance of methylation status of the CDO1 and HOPX genes in BC. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation levels (TaqMethVs) were quantified in 7 BC cell lines and 133 BC patients by TaqMan methylation-specific PCR and functional traits were explored for CDO1. RESULTS: TaqMethVs were associated between CDO1 and HOPX (r(2)=0.072, p=0.002). Multivariate Cox proportional hazards model could identify CDO1 hypermethylation as well as Ki-67 as independent prognostic factors related to disease-specific survival (p=0.016, p<0.001). Overexpression of CDO1 decreased the anchorage-independent growth capacity in BC cell lines. CONCLUSION: CDO1 is a definite tumor suppressor gene, while its prognostic relevance was more than expected in the context of its functional relevance.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the 5'CpG island methylation of estrogen receptor (ER) alpha gene promotor region in ER alpha-negative human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435) and breast cancer tissues; and to investigate the possibility of hydralazine in restoring the expression of ER alpha gene through demethylation. METHODS: The CpG island methylation status of ER alpha gene promotor region-A, B and C in ER alpha-negative human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435) and 20 cases of breast cancer tissues were analyzed using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). The mRNA expression profile of ER alpha isoforms (ERalpha-A, ERalpha-B and ERalpha-C) and coding region in ER alpha gene were analyzed by using RT-PCR, after hydralazine treatment. RESULTS: In the two cell lines studied, CpG island was methylated in ERalpha-A and ERalpha-B but not ERalpha-C. Among them, methylation of CpG island in ERalpha-A was obtained in 13 breast tumor cases; methylation of ERalpha-B seen in 10 tumor cases; methylation of both ERalpha-A and ERalpha-B seen in 9 cases; and methylation of ERalpha-C was obtained in only 1 case. The positivity rates were 65%, 50%, 45% and 5% respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The ER alpha gene non-expression in breast cancer is probably associated with CpG island methylation in ER alpha gene promotor region A and B, and the level of methylation is enhanced as advance of tumors in clinical stage. Hydralazine, served as a demethylating agent enables to restore the expression of ER alpha gene.. OBJECTIVE: To detect the 5'CpG island methylation of estrogen receptor (ER) alpha gene promotor region in ER alpha-negative human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435) and breast cancer tissues; and to investigate the possibility of hydralazine in restoring the expression of ER alpha gene through demethylation. METHODS: The CpG island methylation status of ER alpha gene promotor region-A, B and C in ER alpha-negative human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-435) and 20 cases of breast cancer tissues were analyzed using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). The mRNA expression profile of ER alpha isoforms (ERalpha-A, ERalpha-B and ERalpha-C) and coding region in ER alpha gene were analyzed by using RT-PCR, after hydralazine treatment. RESULTS: In the two cell lines studied, CpG island was methylated in ERalpha-A and ERalpha-B but not ERalpha-C. Among them, methylation of CpG island in ERalpha-A was obtained in 13 breast tumor cases; methylation of ERalpha-B seen in 10 tumor cases; methylation of both ERalpha-A and ERalpha-B seen in 9 cases; and methylation of ERalpha-C was obtained in only 1 case. The positivity rates were 65%, 50%, 45% and 5% respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The ER alpha gene non-expression in breast cancer is probably associated with CpG island methylation in ER alpha gene promotor region A and B, and the level of methylation is enhanced as advance of tumors in clinical stage. Hydralazine, served as a demethylating agent enables to restore the expression of ER alpha gene.

CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteins (C/EBPs) are a highly conserved family of leucine zipper proteins that regulate cell growth and differentiation. C/EBPdelta functions in the initiation and maintenance of mammary epithelial cell G(0) growth arrest and 'loss of function' alterations in C/EBPdelta gene expression have been reported in human breast cancer and in rodent carcinogen-induced mammary tumors. The molecular mechanism underlying reduced C/EBPdelta gene expression in mammary tumorigenesis, however, is unknown. In this report we demonstrate that C/EBPdelta gene expression is undetectable in the SUM-52PE human breast cancer cell line and that silencing of SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene expression is due to epigenetic promoter hypermethylation (26/27 CpGs methylated). The hypermethylated SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene promoter is associated with reduced levels of acetylated Histone H4, consistent with a closed, transcriptionally inactive chromatin conformation. Treatment with 5'-aza-cytidine and trichostatin A (TSA) re-activates cytokine-induced SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene expression. C/EBPdelta gene expression is reduced to virtually undetectable levels in 32% (18/57) of primary human breast tumors. Site-specific CpG methylation was observed in 33% (6/18) of the low C/EBPdelta expressing primary breast tumors. CpG methylation adjacent to the C/EBPdelta proximal promoter Sp1 site was associated with reduced C/EBPdelta expression in a primary breast cancer sample. Electromobility shift assays (EMSA) demonstrated a significant reduction in binding to oligos containing the CpG methylation 5' to the Sp1 binding site. These results demonstrate a direct link between C/EBPdelta gene promoter hyper- and site specific-methylation and reduced C/EBPdelta gene expression in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors.. CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteins (C/EBPs) are a highly conserved family of leucine zipper proteins that regulate cell growth and differentiation. C/EBPdelta functions in the initiation and maintenance of mammary epithelial cell G(0) growth arrest and 'loss of function' alterations in C/EBPdelta gene expression have been reported in human breast cancer and in rodent carcinogen-induced mammary tumors. The molecular mechanism underlying reduced C/EBPdelta gene expression in mammary tumorigenesis, however, is unknown. In this report we demonstrate that C/EBPdelta gene expression is undetectable in the SUM-52PE human breast cancer cell line and that silencing of SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene expression is due to epigenetic promoter hypermethylation (26/27 CpGs methylated). The hypermethylated SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene promoter is associated with reduced levels of acetylated Histone H4, consistent with a closed, transcriptionally inactive chromatin conformation. Treatment with 5'-aza-cytidine and trichostatin A (TSA) re-activates cytokine-induced SUM-52PE C/EBPdelta gene expression. C/EBPdelta gene expression is reduced to virtually undetectable levels in 32% (18/57) of primary human breast tumors. Site-specific CpG methylation was observed in 33% (6/18) of the low C/EBPdelta expressing primary breast tumors. CpG methylation adjacent to the C/EBPdelta proximal promoter Sp1 site was associated with reduced C/EBPdelta expression in a primary breast cancer sample. Electromobility shift assays (EMSA) demonstrated a significant reduction in binding to oligos containing the CpG methylation 5' to the Sp1 binding site. These results demonstrate a direct link between C/EBPdelta gene promoter hyper- and site specific-methylation and reduced C/EBPdelta gene expression in breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors.

Multiple studies have investigated global DNA methylation profiles and gene-specific DNA methylation in blood-based DNA to develop powerful screening markers for cancer. This systematic review summarizes the current evidence on methylation studies that investigated methylation level of blood-derived DNA of breast cancer (BC) patients in comparison to healthy controls by conducting a systematic literature review in PubMed and Web of Science. Essential results, such as methylation levels of BC cases and healthy controls, p values, and odds ratios, were extracted from these studies by two investigators independently. Overall, 45 publications met the inclusion criteria for this review. DNA from whole blood, as well as cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from serum or plasma, was used in these studies. The most common method used for measuring global DNA methylation was the investigation of repetitive elements as surrogates and the application of array-based genome-wide methylation analysis. For measuring gene-specific methylation level, methylation-specific PCR and pyrosequencing were the most frequently used methods. Epigenome-wide blood DNA hypomethylation in BC patients were reported in several studies; however, the evidence is still not conclusive. The most frequently investigated gene in whole blood was BRCA1, which was found more frequently methylated in patients compared to controls. RASSF1A was the most widely investigated gene in cfDNA of serum or plasma, which was also found more frequently methylated in patients compared to controls. Several of the eligible studies reported the associations of global hypomethylation and increased BC risk. Studies investigated associations between gene-specific methylation and BC risk, while got heterogeneous results. But two studies reported that hypermethylation of ATM gene was associated with increased BC risk, which suggest the potential use of this gene for BC risk stratification. Overall, our review suggests the possibility of using blood-based DNA methylation marker as promising marker for BC risk stratification, as several studies found associations between certain methylation level in blood and BC risk. However, so far, the evidence is still quite limited. Optimal markers are yet to be developed and promising results needed to be validated in prospective study cohorts and tested in large screening populations.. Multiple studies have investigated global DNA methylation profiles and gene-specific DNA methylation in blood-based DNA to develop powerful screening markers for cancer. This systematic review summarizes the current evidence on methylation studies that investigated methylation level of blood-derived DNA of breast cancer (BC) patients in comparison to healthy controls by conducting a systematic literature review in PubMed and Web of Science. Essential results, such as methylation levels of BC cases and healthy controls, p values, and odds ratios, were extracted from these studies by two investigators independently. Overall, 45 publications met the inclusion criteria for this review. DNA from whole blood, as well as cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from serum or plasma, was used in these studies. The most common method used for measuring global DNA methylation was the investigation of repetitive elements as surrogates and the application of array-based genome-wide methylation analysis. For measuring gene-specific methylation level, methylation-specific PCR and pyrosequencing were the most frequently used methods. Epigenome-wide blood DNA hypomethylation in BC patients were reported in several studies; however, the evidence is still not conclusive. The most frequently investigated gene in whole blood was BRCA1, which was found more frequently methylated in patients compared to controls. RASSF1A was the most widely investigated gene in cfDNA of serum or plasma, which was also found more frequently methylated in patients compared to controls. Several of the eligible studies reported the associations of global hypomethylation and increased BC risk. Studies investigated associations between gene-specific methylation and BC risk, while got heterogeneous results. But two studies reported that hypermethylation of ATM gene was associated with increased BC risk, which suggest the potential use of this gene for BC risk stratification. Overall, our review suggests the possibility of using blood-based DNA methylation marker as promising marker for BC risk stratification, as several studies found associations between certain methylation level in blood and BC risk. However, so far, the evidence is still quite limited. Optimal markers are yet to be developed and promising results needed to be validated in prospective study cohorts and tested in large screening populations.

DNA methylation changes in peripheral blood DNA have been shown to be associated with solid tumors. We sought to identify methylation alterations in whole blood DNA that are associated with breast cancer (BC). Epigenome-wide DNA methylation profiling on blood DNA from BC cases and healthy controls was performed by applying Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChips. Promising CpG sites were selected and validated in three independent larger sample cohorts via MassARRAY EpiTyper assays. CpG sites located in three genes (cg06418238 in RPTOR, cg00736299 in MGRN1 and cg27466532 in RAPSN), which showed significant hypomethylation in BC patients compared to healthy controls in the discovery cohort (p < 1.00 x 10-6) were selected and successfully validated in three independent cohorts (validation I, n =211; validation II, n=378; validation III, n=520). The observed methylation differences are likely not cell-type specific, as the differences were only seen in whole blood, but not in specific sub cell-types of leucocytes. Moreover, we observed in quartile analysis that women in the lower methylation quartiles of these three loci had higher ORs than women in the higher quartiles. The combined AUC of three loci was 0.79 (95%CI 0.73-0.85) in validation cohort I, and was 0.60 (95%CI 0.54-0.66) and 0.62 (95%CI 0.57-0.67) in validation cohort II and III, respectively. Our study suggests that hypomethylation of CpG sites in RPTOR, MGRN1 and RAPSN in blood is associated with BC and might serve as blood-based marker supplements for BC if these could be verified in prospective studies.. DNA methylation changes in peripheral blood DNA have been shown to be associated with solid tumors. We sought to identify methylation alterations in whole blood DNA that are associated with breast cancer (BC). Epigenome-wide DNA methylation profiling on blood DNA from BC cases and healthy controls was performed by applying Infinium HumanMethylation450K BeadChips. Promising CpG sites were selected and validated in three independent larger sample cohorts via MassARRAY EpiTyper assays. CpG sites located in three genes (cg06418238 in RPTOR, cg00736299 in MGRN1 and cg27466532 in RAPSN), which showed significant hypomethylation in BC patients compared to healthy controls in the discovery cohort (p < 1.00 x 10-6) were selected and successfully validated in three independent cohorts (validation I, n =211; validation II, n=378; validation III, n=520). The observed methylation differences are likely not cell-type specific, as the differences were only seen in whole blood, but not in specific sub cell-types of leucocytes. Moreover, we observed in quartile analysis that women in the lower methylation quartiles of these three loci had higher ORs than women in the higher quartiles. The combined AUC of three loci was 0.79 (95%CI 0.73-0.85) in validation cohort I, and was 0.60 (95%CI 0.54-0.66) and 0.62 (95%CI 0.57-0.67) in validation cohort II and III, respectively. Our study suggests that hypomethylation of CpG sites in RPTOR, MGRN1 and RAPSN in blood is associated with BC and might serve as blood-based marker supplements for BC if these could be verified in prospective studies.

Mutation analysis in breast cancer has failed to explain the inactivation of RhoBTB2, a candidate breast cancer tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 8p. Some breast cancer-related genes in this region become inactivated by hypermethylation, and hypermethylation of RhoBTB2 abrogates its expression in bladder cancers. The aim of the present study was to determine whether RhoBTB2 was silenced by methylation in breast cancer. Nested methylation-speci fi c PCR (nMSP) and quantitative reverse transcription PCR were used to analyze the methylation status and mRNA levels of RhoBTB2 in 50 paired breast cancer and normal tissues and the results were correlated with clinicopathological characteristics. Promoter methylation and the downregulation of RhoBTB2 mRNA was observed in tumor tissues (P<0.001). mRNA levels were decreased in samples with methylation (chi(2) = 15.751, P<0.001). RhoBTB2 methylation was observed preferentially in progesterone receptor (PR)-negative samples (P<0.05). The results demonstrated that aberrant methylation of RhoBTB2 may be responsible for the suppression of RhoBTB2 mRNA expression in breast cancer, a significant event during the genesis of breast cancer that correlated with PR status.. Mutation analysis in breast cancer has failed to explain the inactivation of RhoBTB2, a candidate breast cancer tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 8p. Some breast cancer-related genes in this region become inactivated by hypermethylation, and hypermethylation of RhoBTB2 abrogates its expression in bladder cancers. The aim of the present study was to determine whether RhoBTB2 was silenced by methylation in breast cancer. Nested methylation-speci fi c PCR (nMSP) and quantitative reverse transcription PCR were used to analyze the methylation status and mRNA levels of RhoBTB2 in 50 paired breast cancer and normal tissues and the results were correlated with clinicopathological characteristics. Promoter methylation and the downregulation of RhoBTB2 mRNA was observed in tumor tissues (P<0.001). mRNA levels were decreased in samples with methylation (chi(2) = 15.751, P<0.001). RhoBTB2 methylation was observed preferentially in progesterone receptor (PR)-negative samples (P<0.05). The results demonstrated that aberrant methylation of RhoBTB2 may be responsible for the suppression of RhoBTB2 mRNA expression in breast cancer, a significant event during the genesis of breast cancer that correlated with PR status.

BACKGROUND: The mechanism of the observed association between body mass, particularly centralized body fat, and postmenopausal breast cancer risk is not well understood. OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that body mass may affect DNA methylation through increased estrogen and chronic inflammation. The association between body mass and promoter methylation in breast tumors was investigated in a population-based, case-control study. DESIGN: The promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta(2) genes was assessed in breast tumor blocks from 803 pre- and postmenopausal cases by using real-time methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Unconditional logistic regression was used to derive the adjusted OR and 95% CI for case-case comparisons of tumors with and without promoter methylation of the genes. RESULTS: The frequency of promoter methylation was 20% for E-cadherin, 25.9% for p16, and 27.5% for RAR-beta(2). There was no difference in the prevalence of the DNA methylation of individual genes by BMI, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), or lifetime weight change between the age of 20 y and the present. However, in a case-case comparison of postmenopausal breast cancer, a greater WHR was associated with an increased likelihood of >/=1 of the 3 genes being methylated (OR: 1.85; 95% CI: 1.10, 3.11; P-trend < 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: We showed that WHR was associated with DNA promoter methylation of >/=1 of 3 genes in postmenopausal breast tumors. It may be that the association of body fat composition and postmenopausal breast cancer is related to altered DNA methylation. However, future studies in other populations and with an examination of the methylation of more genes are needed.. BACKGROUND: The mechanism of the observed association between body mass, particularly centralized body fat, and postmenopausal breast cancer risk is not well understood. OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that body mass may affect DNA methylation through increased estrogen and chronic inflammation. The association between body mass and promoter methylation in breast tumors was investigated in a population-based, case-control study. DESIGN: The promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta(2) genes was assessed in breast tumor blocks from 803 pre- and postmenopausal cases by using real-time methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Unconditional logistic regression was used to derive the adjusted OR and 95% CI for case-case comparisons of tumors with and without promoter methylation of the genes. RESULTS: The frequency of promoter methylation was 20% for E-cadherin, 25.9% for p16, and 27.5% for RAR-beta(2). There was no difference in the prevalence of the DNA methylation of individual genes by BMI, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), or lifetime weight change between the age of 20 y and the present. However, in a case-case comparison of postmenopausal breast cancer, a greater WHR was associated with an increased likelihood of >/=1 of the 3 genes being methylated (OR: 1.85; 95% CI: 1.10, 3.11; P-trend < 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: We showed that WHR was associated with DNA promoter methylation of >/=1 of 3 genes in postmenopausal breast tumors. It may be that the association of body fat composition and postmenopausal breast cancer is related to altered DNA methylation. However, future studies in other populations and with an examination of the methylation of more genes are needed.

The mechanism for the observed association of alcohol consumption breast cancer risk is not known; understanding that mechanism could improve understanding of breast carcinogenesis and optimize prevention strategies. Alcohol may impact breast malignancies or tumor progression by altering DNA methylation. We examined promoter methylation of three genes, the E-cadherin, p16, and retinoic acid-binding receptor-beta2 (RAR-beta2) genes in archived breast tumor tissues from participants in a population-based case-control study. Real time methylation-specific PCR was performed on 803 paraffin-embedded samples, and lifetime alcohol consumption was queried. Unordered polytomous and unconditional logistic regression were used to derive adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RAR-beta2 methylation was not associated with drinking. Among premenopausal women, alcohol consumption was also not associated with promoter methylation for E-cadherin and p16 genes. In case-case comparisons of postmenopausal breast cancer, compared with lifetime never drinkers, promoter methylation likelihood was increased for higher alcohol intake for E-cadherin (OR=2.39; 95% CI, 1.15-4.96), in particular for those with estrogen receptor-negative tumors (OR=4.13; 95% CI, 1.16-14.72), and decreased for p16 (OR=0.52; 95% CI, 0.29-0.92). There were indications that the association with p16 was stronger for drinking at younger ages. Methylation was also associated with drinking intensity independent of total consumption for both genes. We found alcohol consumption was associated with DNA methylation in postmenopausal breast tumors, suggesting that the association of alcohol and breast cancer may be related, at least in part, to altered methylation, and may differ by drinking pattern.. The mechanism for the observed association of alcohol consumption breast cancer risk is not known; understanding that mechanism could improve understanding of breast carcinogenesis and optimize prevention strategies. Alcohol may impact breast malignancies or tumor progression by altering DNA methylation. We examined promoter methylation of three genes, the E-cadherin, p16, and retinoic acid-binding receptor-beta2 (RAR-beta2) genes in archived breast tumor tissues from participants in a population-based case-control study. Real time methylation-specific PCR was performed on 803 paraffin-embedded samples, and lifetime alcohol consumption was queried. Unordered polytomous and unconditional logistic regression were used to derive adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RAR-beta2 methylation was not associated with drinking. Among premenopausal women, alcohol consumption was also not associated with promoter methylation for E-cadherin and p16 genes. In case-case comparisons of postmenopausal breast cancer, compared with lifetime never drinkers, promoter methylation likelihood was increased for higher alcohol intake for E-cadherin (OR=2.39; 95% CI, 1.15-4.96), in particular for those with estrogen receptor-negative tumors (OR=4.13; 95% CI, 1.16-14.72), and decreased for p16 (OR=0.52; 95% CI, 0.29-0.92). There were indications that the association with p16 was stronger for drinking at younger ages. Methylation was also associated with drinking intensity independent of total consumption for both genes. We found alcohol consumption was associated with DNA methylation in postmenopausal breast tumors, suggesting that the association of alcohol and breast cancer may be related, at least in part, to altered methylation, and may differ by drinking pattern.

There is evidence that epigenetic changes occur early in breast carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that early-life exposures associated with breast cancer would be associated with epigenetic alterations in breast tumors. In particular, we examined DNA methylation patterns in breast tumors in association with several early-life exposures in a population-based case-control study. Promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16 and RAR-beta2 genes was assessed in archived tumor blocks from 803 cases with real-time methylation-specific PCR. Unconditional logistic regression was used for case-case comparisons of those with and without promoter methylation. We found no differences in the prevalence of DNA methylation of the individual genes by age at menarche, age at first live birth and weight at age 20. In case-case comparisons of premenopausal breast cancer, lower birth weight was associated with increased likelihood of E-cadherin promoter methylation (OR = 2.79, 95% CI, 1.15-6.82, for 2.5 v. 2.6-2.9 kg); higher adult height with RAR-beta2 methylation (OR = 3.34, 95% CI, 1.19-9.39, for 1.65 v. <1.60 m); and not having been breastfed with p16 methylation (OR = 2.75, 95% CI, 1.14-6.62). Among postmenopausal breast cancers, birth order was associated with increased likelihood of p16 promoter methylation. Being other than first in the birth order was inversely associated with likelihood of 1 of the three genes being methylated for premenopausal breast cancers, but positively associated with methylation in postmenopausal women. These results suggest that there may be alterations in methylation associated with early-life exposures that persist into adulthood and affect breast cancer risk.. There is evidence that epigenetic changes occur early in breast carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that early-life exposures associated with breast cancer would be associated with epigenetic alterations in breast tumors. In particular, we examined DNA methylation patterns in breast tumors in association with several early-life exposures in a population-based case-control study. Promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16 and RAR-beta2 genes was assessed in archived tumor blocks from 803 cases with real-time methylation-specific PCR. Unconditional logistic regression was used for case-case comparisons of those with and without promoter methylation. We found no differences in the prevalence of DNA methylation of the individual genes by age at menarche, age at first live birth and weight at age 20. In case-case comparisons of premenopausal breast cancer, lower birth weight was associated with increased likelihood of E-cadherin promoter methylation (OR = 2.79, 95% CI, 1.15-6.82, for 2.5 v. 2.6-2.9 kg); higher adult height with RAR-beta2 methylation (OR = 3.34, 95% CI, 1.19-9.39, for 1.65 v. <1.60 m); and not having been breastfed with p16 methylation (OR = 2.75, 95% CI, 1.14-6.62). Among postmenopausal breast cancers, birth order was associated with increased likelihood of p16 promoter methylation. Being other than first in the birth order was inversely associated with likelihood of 1 of the three genes being methylated for premenopausal breast cancers, but positively associated with methylation in postmenopausal women. These results suggest that there may be alterations in methylation associated with early-life exposures that persist into adulthood and affect breast cancer risk.

Aberrant DNA methylation plays a critical role in carcinogenesis, and the availability of dietary factors involved in 1-carbon metabolism may contribute to aberrant DNA methylation. We investigated the association of intake of folate, vitamins B(2), B(6), B(12), and methionine with promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta(2) genes in archived tumor tissues from incident, primary breast cancer cases in a population-based case-control study. Real-time methylation-specific PCR was performed on 803 paraffin-embedded samples; usual dietary intake was queried from a food frequency questionnaire. Unconditional logistic regression was used to derive adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for likelihood of promoter methylation for high compared to low intake of those 1-carbon nutrients. Overall, in case-case comparisons, dietary intakes of folate, vitamins B(2), B(6), B(12), and methionine were not associated with likelihood of promoter methylation of E- cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta(2) for all cases combined or within strata defined by menopausal status and estrogen receptor status in this study. This finding, however, does not exclude the possibility that intake of such nutrients might have the ability to modulate promoter methylation in normal or premalignant (dysplastic) breast tissue.. Aberrant DNA methylation plays a critical role in carcinogenesis, and the availability of dietary factors involved in 1-carbon metabolism may contribute to aberrant DNA methylation. We investigated the association of intake of folate, vitamins B(2), B(6), B(12), and methionine with promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta(2) genes in archived tumor tissues from incident, primary breast cancer cases in a population-based case-control study. Real-time methylation-specific PCR was performed on 803 paraffin-embedded samples; usual dietary intake was queried from a food frequency questionnaire. Unconditional logistic regression was used to derive adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals for likelihood of promoter methylation for high compared to low intake of those 1-carbon nutrients. Overall, in case-case comparisons, dietary intakes of folate, vitamins B(2), B(6), B(12), and methionine were not associated with likelihood of promoter methylation of E- cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta(2) for all cases combined or within strata defined by menopausal status and estrogen receptor status in this study. This finding, however, does not exclude the possibility that intake of such nutrients might have the ability to modulate promoter methylation in normal or premalignant (dysplastic) breast tissue.

Aberrant promoter methylation is recognized as an important feature of breast carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that genetic variation of genes for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and methionine synthase (MTR), two critical enzymes in the one-carbon metabolism, may alter DNA methylation levels and thus influence DNA methylation in breast cancer. We evaluated case-control association of MTHFR C677T, A1298C, and MTR A2756G polymorphisms for cases strata-defined by promoter methylation status for each of three genes, E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta2 in breast cancer; in addition, we evaluated case-case comparisons of the likelihood of promoter methylation in relation to genotypes using a population-based case-control study conducted in Western New York State. Methylation was evaluated with real-time methylation-specific PCRs for 803 paraffin-embedded breast tumor tissues from women with primary, incident breast cancer. We applied unordered polytomous regression and unconditional logistic regression to derive adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. We did not find any association of MTHFR and MTR polymorphisms with breast cancer risk stratified by methylation status nor between polymorphisms and likelihood of promoter methylation of any of the genes. There was no evidence of difference within strata defined by menopausal status, estrogen receptor status, folate intake, and lifetime alcohol consumption. Overall, we found no evidence that these common polymorphisms of the MTHFR and MTR genes are associated with promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta2 genes in breast cancer.. Aberrant promoter methylation is recognized as an important feature of breast carcinogenesis. We hypothesized that genetic variation of genes for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and methionine synthase (MTR), two critical enzymes in the one-carbon metabolism, may alter DNA methylation levels and thus influence DNA methylation in breast cancer. We evaluated case-control association of MTHFR C677T, A1298C, and MTR A2756G polymorphisms for cases strata-defined by promoter methylation status for each of three genes, E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta2 in breast cancer; in addition, we evaluated case-case comparisons of the likelihood of promoter methylation in relation to genotypes using a population-based case-control study conducted in Western New York State. Methylation was evaluated with real-time methylation-specific PCRs for 803 paraffin-embedded breast tumor tissues from women with primary, incident breast cancer. We applied unordered polytomous regression and unconditional logistic regression to derive adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. We did not find any association of MTHFR and MTR polymorphisms with breast cancer risk stratified by methylation status nor between polymorphisms and likelihood of promoter methylation of any of the genes. There was no evidence of difference within strata defined by menopausal status, estrogen receptor status, folate intake, and lifetime alcohol consumption. Overall, we found no evidence that these common polymorphisms of the MTHFR and MTR genes are associated with promoter methylation of E-cadherin, p16, and RAR-beta2 genes in breast cancer.

The presence of frequent methylation of CpG islands (CGIs), designated as the CpG island methylator phenotype in some cancers, is associated with distinct clinicopathological characteristics, including gene amplification, in individual tumor types. Amplification of HER2 in human breast cancers is an important prognostic and therapeutic target, but an association between HER2 amplification and frequent CGI methylation is unknown. To clarify the association, we here quantified methylation levels of promoter CGIs of 11 genes, which are unlikely to confer growth advantage to cells, in 63 human breast cancers. The number of methylated genes in a cancer did not obey a bimodal distribution, and the 63 cancers were classified into those with frequent methylation (n = 16), moderate methylation (n = 26) and no methylation (n = 21). The incidence of HER2 amplification was significantly higher in the cancers with frequent methylation (11 of 16) than in those with no methylation (2 of 21, P = 0.001). Also, the number of methylated genes correlated with the degree of HER2 amplification (r = 0.411, P = 0.002). Correlation analysis with clinicopathological characteristics and methylation of CDKN2A, BRCA1 and CDH1 revealed that frequent methylation had significant correlation with higher nuclear grades (P = 0.001). These showed that frequent methylation had a strong association with HER2 amplification in breast cancers and suggested that frequent methylation can be a determinant of various characteristics in a fraction of human breast cancers.. The presence of frequent methylation of CpG islands (CGIs), designated as the CpG island methylator phenotype in some cancers, is associated with distinct clinicopathological characteristics, including gene amplification, in individual tumor types. Amplification of HER2 in human breast cancers is an important prognostic and therapeutic target, but an association between HER2 amplification and frequent CGI methylation is unknown. To clarify the association, we here quantified methylation levels of promoter CGIs of 11 genes, which are unlikely to confer growth advantage to cells, in 63 human breast cancers. The number of methylated genes in a cancer did not obey a bimodal distribution, and the 63 cancers were classified into those with frequent methylation (n = 16), moderate methylation (n = 26) and no methylation (n = 21). The incidence of HER2 amplification was significantly higher in the cancers with frequent methylation (11 of 16) than in those with no methylation (2 of 21, P = 0.001). Also, the number of methylated genes correlated with the degree of HER2 amplification (r = 0.411, P = 0.002). Correlation analysis with clinicopathological characteristics and methylation of CDKN2A, BRCA1 and CDH1 revealed that frequent methylation had significant correlation with higher nuclear grades (P = 0.001). These showed that frequent methylation had a strong association with HER2 amplification in breast cancers and suggested that frequent methylation can be a determinant of various characteristics in a fraction of human breast cancers.

Identifying molecular alterations in normal tissue adjacent to cancer is important for understanding cancer aetiology and designing preventive measures. Here we analyse the DNA methylome of 569 breast tissue samples, including 50 from cancer-free women and 84 from matched normal cancer pairs. We use statistical algorithms for dissecting intra- and inter-sample cellular heterogeneity and demonstrate that normal tissue adjacent to breast cancer is characterized by tens to thousands of epigenetic alterations. We show that their genomic distribution is non-random, being strongly enriched for binding sites of transcription factors specifying chromatin architecture. We validate the field defects in an independent cohort and demonstrate that over 30% of the alterations exhibit increased enrichment within matched cancer samples. Breast cancers highly enriched for epigenetic field defects, exhibit adverse clinical outcome. Our data support a model where clonal epigenetic reprogramming towards reduced differentiation in normal tissue is an important step in breast carcinogenesis.. Identifying molecular alterations in normal tissue adjacent to cancer is important for understanding cancer aetiology and designing preventive measures. Here we analyse the DNA methylome of 569 breast tissue samples, including 50 from cancer-free women and 84 from matched normal cancer pairs. We use statistical algorithms for dissecting intra- and inter-sample cellular heterogeneity and demonstrate that normal tissue adjacent to breast cancer is characterized by tens to thousands of epigenetic alterations. We show that their genomic distribution is non-random, being strongly enriched for binding sites of transcription factors specifying chromatin architecture. We validate the field defects in an independent cohort and demonstrate that over 30% of the alterations exhibit increased enrichment within matched cancer samples. Breast cancers highly enriched for epigenetic field defects, exhibit adverse clinical outcome. Our data support a model where clonal epigenetic reprogramming towards reduced differentiation in normal tissue is an important step in breast carcinogenesis.

We previously reported that expression of an environmentally induced gene, mineral dust-induced gene (mdig), predicts overall survival in breast cancer patients. In the present report, we further demonstrate the differential roles of mdig between earlier- and later-stage breast cancers. In noncancerous breast, mdig is a proliferation factor for cell growth and cell motility. In breast cancer, however, higher levels of mdig negatively regulate the migration and invasion of cancer cells. Assessment of global DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility and H3K9me3 heterochromatin signature suggests that silencing mdig enhances DNA and histone methylation. Through immunostaining and data mining, we found that mdig is significantly upregulated in noninvasive and/or earlier-stage breast cancers. In contrast, in triple-negative and other invasive breast cancers, diminished mdig expression was noted, indicating that the loss of mdig expression could be an important feature of aggressive breast cancers. Taken together, our data suggest that mdig is a new biomarker that likely promotes tumor growth in the early stages of breast cancer while acting as a tumor suppressor to inhibit invasion and metastasis in later-stage tumors.. We previously reported that expression of an environmentally induced gene, mineral dust-induced gene (mdig), predicts overall survival in breast cancer patients. In the present report, we further demonstrate the differential roles of mdig between earlier- and later-stage breast cancers. In noncancerous breast, mdig is a proliferation factor for cell growth and cell motility. In breast cancer, however, higher levels of mdig negatively regulate the migration and invasion of cancer cells. Assessment of global DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility and H3K9me3 heterochromatin signature suggests that silencing mdig enhances DNA and histone methylation. Through immunostaining and data mining, we found that mdig is significantly upregulated in noninvasive and/or earlier-stage breast cancers. In contrast, in triple-negative and other invasive breast cancers, diminished mdig expression was noted, indicating that the loss of mdig expression could be an important feature of aggressive breast cancers. Taken together, our data suggest that mdig is a new biomarker that likely promotes tumor growth in the early stages of breast cancer while acting as a tumor suppressor to inhibit invasion and metastasis in later-stage tumors.

Prognostic biomarkers serve a variety of purposes in cancer treatment and research, such as prediction of cancer progression, and treatment eligibility. Despite growing interest in multi-omic data integration for defining prognostic biomarkers, validated methods have been slow to emerge. Given that breast cancer has been the focus of intense research, it is amenable to studying the benefits of multi-omic prognostic models due to the availability of datasets. Thus, we examined the efficacy of our methylation-to-expression feature model (M2EFM) approach to combining molecular and clinical predictors to create risk scores for overall survival, distant metastasis, and chemosensitivity in breast cancer. Gene expression, DNA methylation, and clinical variables were integrated via M2EFM to build models of overall survival using 1028 breast tumor samples and applied to validation cohorts of 61 and 327 samples. Models of distant recurrence-free survival and pathologic complete response were built using 306 samples and validated on 182 samples. Despite different populations and assays, M2EFM models validated with good accuracy (C-index or AUC >/= 0.7) for all outcomes and had the most consistent performance compared to other methods. Finally, we demonstrated that M2EFM identifies functionally relevant genes, which could be useful in translating an M2EFM biomarker to the clinic.. Prognostic biomarkers serve a variety of purposes in cancer treatment and research, such as prediction of cancer progression, and treatment eligibility. Despite growing interest in multi-omic data integration for defining prognostic biomarkers, validated methods have been slow to emerge. Given that breast cancer has been the focus of intense research, it is amenable to studying the benefits of multi-omic prognostic models due to the availability of datasets. Thus, we examined the efficacy of our methylation-to-expression feature model (M2EFM) approach to combining molecular and clinical predictors to create risk scores for overall survival, distant metastasis, and chemosensitivity in breast cancer. Gene expression, DNA methylation, and clinical variables were integrated via M2EFM to build models of overall survival using 1028 breast tumor samples and applied to validation cohorts of 61 and 327 samples. Models of distant recurrence-free survival and pathologic complete response were built using 306 samples and validated on 182 samples. Despite different populations and assays, M2EFM models validated with good accuracy (C-index or AUC >/= 0.7) for all outcomes and had the most consistent performance compared to other methods. Finally, we demonstrated that M2EFM identifies functionally relevant genes, which could be useful in translating an M2EFM biomarker to the clinic.

FOXF2 (forkhead box F2) is a mesenchyme-specific transcription factor that plays a critical role in tissue homeostasis through the maintenance of epithelial polarity. In a previous study, we demonstrated that FOXF2 is specifically expressed in basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) cells and functions as an epithelial-mesenchymal transition suppressor. FOXF2 deficiency enhances the metastatic ability of BLBC cells through activation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition program, but reduces cell proliferation. In this study, we demonstrate that CpG island methylation of the FOXF2 proximal promoter region is involved in the regulatory mechanism of the subtype-specific expression of FOXF2 in breast cancer cells. DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B commonly or individually contributed to this DNA methylation in different breast cancer cells. SP1 regulated the transcriptional activity of FOXF2 through direct binding to the proximal promoter region, whereas this binding was abrogated through DNA methylation. FOXF2 mediated the SP1-regulated suppression of progression and promotion of proliferation of non-methylated BLBC cells. Thus, we conclude that the subtype-specific expression and function of FOXF2 in breast cancer cells are regulated through the combined effects of DNA methylation and SP1 transcriptional regulation.. FOXF2 (forkhead box F2) is a mesenchyme-specific transcription factor that plays a critical role in tissue homeostasis through the maintenance of epithelial polarity. In a previous study, we demonstrated that FOXF2 is specifically expressed in basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) cells and functions as an epithelial-mesenchymal transition suppressor. FOXF2 deficiency enhances the metastatic ability of BLBC cells through activation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition program, but reduces cell proliferation. In this study, we demonstrate that CpG island methylation of the FOXF2 proximal promoter region is involved in the regulatory mechanism of the subtype-specific expression of FOXF2 in breast cancer cells. DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B commonly or individually contributed to this DNA methylation in different breast cancer cells. SP1 regulated the transcriptional activity of FOXF2 through direct binding to the proximal promoter region, whereas this binding was abrogated through DNA methylation. FOXF2 mediated the SP1-regulated suppression of progression and promotion of proliferation of non-methylated BLBC cells. Thus, we conclude that the subtype-specific expression and function of FOXF2 in breast cancer cells are regulated through the combined effects of DNA methylation and SP1 transcriptional regulation.

Heterogeneous DNA methylation patterns are linked to tumor growth. In order to study DNA methylation heterogeneity patterns for breast cancer cell lines, we comparatively study four metrics: variance, I (2) statistic, entropy, and methylation state. Using the categorical metric methylation state, we select the two most heterogeneous states to identify genes that directly affect tumor suppressor genes and high- or moderate-risk breast cancer genes. Utilizing the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis software and the ConsensusPath Database visualization tool, we generate integrated gene networks to study biological relations of heterogeneous genes. This analysis has allowed us to contribute 19 potential breast cancer biomarker genes to cancer databases by locating "hub genes" - heterogeneous genes of significant biological interactions, selected from numerous cancer modules. We have discovered a considerable relationship between these hub genes and heterogeneously methylated oncogenes. Our results have many implications for further heterogeneity analyses of methylation patterns and early detection of breast cancer susceptibility.. Heterogeneous DNA methylation patterns are linked to tumor growth. In order to study DNA methylation heterogeneity patterns for breast cancer cell lines, we comparatively study four metrics: variance, I (2) statistic, entropy, and methylation state. Using the categorical metric methylation state, we select the two most heterogeneous states to identify genes that directly affect tumor suppressor genes and high- or moderate-risk breast cancer genes. Utilizing the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis software and the ConsensusPath Database visualization tool, we generate integrated gene networks to study biological relations of heterogeneous genes. This analysis has allowed us to contribute 19 potential breast cancer biomarker genes to cancer databases by locating "hub genes" - heterogeneous genes of significant biological interactions, selected from numerous cancer modules. We have discovered a considerable relationship between these hub genes and heterogeneously methylated oncogenes. Our results have many implications for further heterogeneity analyses of methylation patterns and early detection of breast cancer susceptibility.

Methylation pattern is presented here for first time as a potential molecular marker of changes on SSTR2A and SHP-1(I) gene promoter related to breast and prostate carcinoma. Our results have shown low concordances with SSTR2A and methylated state in prostate cancer and moderate relationship with unmethylated CpG-27 in breast cancer. We found significant concordances for both cancers and SHP-1(I) unmethylation, and increased HER2 expression and SSTR2A methylation in breast cancer. Moreover, we found a correlation between methylation patterns of two genes in normal breast tissue. These data might assist to select subgroups of patients for the administration of alternative therapies.. Methylation pattern is presented here for first time as a potential molecular marker of changes on SSTR2A and SHP-1(I) gene promoter related to breast and prostate carcinoma. Our results have shown low concordances with SSTR2A and methylated state in prostate cancer and moderate relationship with unmethylated CpG-27 in breast cancer. We found significant concordances for both cancers and SHP-1(I) unmethylation, and increased HER2 expression and SSTR2A methylation in breast cancer. Moreover, we found a correlation between methylation patterns of two genes in normal breast tissue. These data might assist to select subgroups of patients for the administration of alternative therapies.

Medullary carcinoma is a poorly differentiated breast cancer with a high histologic grade and a paradoxically good prognosis. It accounts for only 3 percent of all breast cancers except in BRCA-1 families, in which it can account for as many as 13 percent of cancers. To date, only histologic criteria have been used to define this tumor type. In an attempt to more clearly define the genetic pathway leading to this subtype of cancer, we recently demonstrated that nearly 100 percent of these carcinomas display p53 mutations. In the present study, we extended our analysis to include HIN-1, a candidate tumor suppressor that has been shown to be silenced by methylation in the majority of breast tumors. In striking contrast to unselected sporadic invasive ductal carcinoma, we show that medullary carcinomas do not display a high frequency of HIN-1 methylation (p less than 0.001). This feature is also found in BRCA-1 associated tumors that shared several histologic characteristics with medullary carcinomas of the breast. Medullary carcinoma of the breast should therefore be considered to be a unique entity defined by specific histologic and molecular traits.. Medullary carcinoma is a poorly differentiated breast cancer with a high histologic grade and a paradoxically good prognosis. It accounts for only 3 percent of all breast cancers except in BRCA-1 families, in which it can account for as many as 13 percent of cancers. To date, only histologic criteria have been used to define this tumor type. In an attempt to more clearly define the genetic pathway leading to this subtype of cancer, we recently demonstrated that nearly 100 percent of these carcinomas display p53 mutations. In the present study, we extended our analysis to include HIN-1, a candidate tumor suppressor that has been shown to be silenced by methylation in the majority of breast tumors. In striking contrast to unselected sporadic invasive ductal carcinoma, we show that medullary carcinomas do not display a high frequency of HIN-1 methylation (p less than 0.001). This feature is also found in BRCA-1 associated tumors that shared several histologic characteristics with medullary carcinomas of the breast. Medullary carcinoma of the breast should therefore be considered to be a unique entity defined by specific histologic and molecular traits.

Breast cancer is a complex disease consisting of four distinct molecular subtypes. DNA methylation-based (DNAm) studies in tumors are complicated further by disease heterogeneity. In the present study, we compared DNAm in breast tumors with normal-adjacent breast samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We constructed models stratified by tumor stage and PAM50 molecular subtype and performed cell-type reference-free deconvolution to control for cellular heterogeneity. We identified nineteen differentially methylated gene regions (DMGRs) in early stage tumors across eleven genes (AGRN, C1orf170, FAM41C, FLJ39609, HES4, ISG15, KLHL17, NOC2L, PLEKHN1, SAMD11, WASH5P). These regions were consistently differentially methylated in every subtype and all implicated genes are localized to the chromosomal cytoband 1p36.3. Seventeen of these DMGRs were independently validated in a similar analysis of an external data set. The identification and validation of shared DNAm alterations across tumor subtypes in early stage tumors advances our understanding of common biology underlying breast carcinogenesis and may contribute to biomarker development. We also discuss evidence of the specific importance and potential function of 1p36 in cancer.. Breast cancer is a complex disease consisting of four distinct molecular subtypes. DNA methylation-based (DNAm) studies in tumors are complicated further by disease heterogeneity. In the present study, we compared DNAm in breast tumors with normal-adjacent breast samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We constructed models stratified by tumor stage and PAM50 molecular subtype and performed cell-type reference-free deconvolution to control for cellular heterogeneity. We identified nineteen differentially methylated gene regions (DMGRs) in early stage tumors across eleven genes (AGRN, C1orf170, FAM41C, FLJ39609, HES4, ISG15, KLHL17, NOC2L, PLEKHN1, SAMD11, WASH5P). These regions were consistently differentially methylated in every subtype and all implicated genes are localized to the chromosomal cytoband 1p36.3. Seventeen of these DMGRs were independently validated in a similar analysis of an external data set. The identification and validation of shared DNAm alterations across tumor subtypes in early stage tumors advances our understanding of common biology underlying breast carcinogenesis and may contribute to biomarker development. We also discuss evidence of the specific importance and potential function of 1p36 in cancer.

PURPOSE: The link between BRCA1 dysfunction and basal-like breast cancer or triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has been suggested; however, the associations of other factors involved in the Fanconi anemia (FA)/BRCA pathway with the pathogenesis of basal-like breast cancer remain unidentified. FANCF protein is a component of the FA core complex. The methylation of CpG islands in the FANCF gene plays an important role in occurrence of ovarian cancer and also is an important regulator of cisplatin sensitivity of ovarian cancer. The purpose of this study is to investigate the frequency of FANCF methylation, and to discuss its involvement in the pathogenesis of TNBC and its potency as a predictor of cisplatin sensitivity for breast cancer. METHODS: The methylation of the FANCF gene promoter was investigated, using methylation-specific PCR, in genomic DNA of 99 invasive breast carcinoma specimens obtained from Japanese patients. RESULTS: FANCF methylation was recognized in only 4 of 99 cases (4.0%). No significant correlation was found between FANCF methylation and the expression of ER, PR, HER2, and TNBC. CONCLUSIONS: FANCF methylation is a rare event in Japanese primary invasive breast cancer. This suggests it is not involved in the pathogenesis of TNBC, and it could not be used as a predictor of cisplatin sensitivity in breast cancer.. PURPOSE: The link between BRCA1 dysfunction and basal-like breast cancer or triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has been suggested; however, the associations of other factors involved in the Fanconi anemia (FA)/BRCA pathway with the pathogenesis of basal-like breast cancer remain unidentified. FANCF protein is a component of the FA core complex. The methylation of CpG islands in the FANCF gene plays an important role in occurrence of ovarian cancer and also is an important regulator of cisplatin sensitivity of ovarian cancer. The purpose of this study is to investigate the frequency of FANCF methylation, and to discuss its involvement in the pathogenesis of TNBC and its potency as a predictor of cisplatin sensitivity for breast cancer. METHODS: The methylation of the FANCF gene promoter was investigated, using methylation-specific PCR, in genomic DNA of 99 invasive breast carcinoma specimens obtained from Japanese patients. RESULTS: FANCF methylation was recognized in only 4 of 99 cases (4.0%). No significant correlation was found between FANCF methylation and the expression of ER, PR, HER2, and TNBC. CONCLUSIONS: FANCF methylation is a rare event in Japanese primary invasive breast cancer. This suggests it is not involved in the pathogenesis of TNBC, and it could not be used as a predictor of cisplatin sensitivity in breast cancer.

INTRODUCTION: Aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. However, its impact on tumor development is not fully determined, and its potential as a diagnostic biomarker remains to be validated. Methylation profiling of invasive breast carcinoma has been largely explored. Conversely, very little and sparse information is available on early-stage breast cancer. To gain insight into the epigenetic switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events during breast carcinogenesis, we have analyzed the DNA methylation profile of ductal carcinoma in situ, a premalignant breast lesion with a great potential to progress toward invasive carcinoma. METHODS: We have utilized a comprehensive and sensitive array-based DNA mapping technique, the methylated-CpG island recovery assay, to profile the DNA methylation pattern in ductal carcinoma in situ. Differential methylation of CpG islands was compared genome-wide in tumor DNA versus normal DNA utilizing a statistical linear model in the LIMMA software package. RESULTS: Using this approach, we have identified 108 significant CpG islands that undergo aberrant DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ and stage I breast tumors, with methylation frequencies greater than or comparable with those of more advanced invasive carcinoma (50% to 93%). A substantial fraction of these hypermethylated CpG islands (32% of the annotated CpG islands) is associated with several homeobox genes, such as the TLX1, HOXB13, and HNF1B genes. Fifty-three percent of the genes hypermethylated in early-stage breast cancer overlap with known Polycomb targets and include homeobox genes and other developmental transcription factors. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a series of new potential methylation biomarkers that may help elucidate the underlying mechanisms of breast tumorigenesis. More specifically, our results are suggestive of a critical role of homeobox gene methylation in the insurgence and/or progression of breast cancer.. INTRODUCTION: Aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. However, its impact on tumor development is not fully determined, and its potential as a diagnostic biomarker remains to be validated. Methylation profiling of invasive breast carcinoma has been largely explored. Conversely, very little and sparse information is available on early-stage breast cancer. To gain insight into the epigenetic switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events during breast carcinogenesis, we have analyzed the DNA methylation profile of ductal carcinoma in situ, a premalignant breast lesion with a great potential to progress toward invasive carcinoma. METHODS: We have utilized a comprehensive and sensitive array-based DNA mapping technique, the methylated-CpG island recovery assay, to profile the DNA methylation pattern in ductal carcinoma in situ. Differential methylation of CpG islands was compared genome-wide in tumor DNA versus normal DNA utilizing a statistical linear model in the LIMMA software package. RESULTS: Using this approach, we have identified 108 significant CpG islands that undergo aberrant DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ and stage I breast tumors, with methylation frequencies greater than or comparable with those of more advanced invasive carcinoma (50% to 93%). A substantial fraction of these hypermethylated CpG islands (32% of the annotated CpG islands) is associated with several homeobox genes, such as the TLX1, HOXB13, and HNF1B genes. Fifty-three percent of the genes hypermethylated in early-stage breast cancer overlap with known Polycomb targets and include homeobox genes and other developmental transcription factors. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a series of new potential methylation biomarkers that may help elucidate the underlying mechanisms of breast tumorigenesis. More specifically, our results are suggestive of a critical role of homeobox gene methylation in the insurgence and/or progression of breast cancer.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is upregulated in primary breast cancers and a major candidate for osteoclastic bone resorption present at sites of breast cancer to bone metastases. Using a human model of mammary epithelial cell lines differing in tumorigenicity and PTHrP expression, we investigated the role of epigenetic modifications for PTHrP expression. Quantitative analysis of the DNA methylation patterns at a total of 104 CpGs in the promoter region of PTHrP by pyrosequencing showed the absence of methylation in all analyzed cell lines in the large CpG island upstream of exon 1C. In the second intron of promoter 2 (P2) a region was identified containing 4 CpG nucleotides for which differential methylation correlated with the PTHrP expression level. The functional importance of this control mechanism was confirmed by the ability of the demethylating agent 5'-azacytidine to induce PTHrP mRNA and iPTHrP protein expression in previously non-expressing cell lines and increase their production by metastatic NS2T2A1 cells. In particular, transcription from P2 was activated non-tumoral S1T3 cells upon treatment with 5'-azacytidine. Our findings support the hypothesis that the methylation status of specific CpG dinucleotides is the dominant mechanism involved in silencing of PTHrP expression rather than the overall methylation of the CpG island. Methylation of the PTHrP P2 is a potential marker of breast cancer progression and might be used to evaluate the metastatic potential of breast tumors.. Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) is upregulated in primary breast cancers and a major candidate for osteoclastic bone resorption present at sites of breast cancer to bone metastases. Using a human model of mammary epithelial cell lines differing in tumorigenicity and PTHrP expression, we investigated the role of epigenetic modifications for PTHrP expression. Quantitative analysis of the DNA methylation patterns at a total of 104 CpGs in the promoter region of PTHrP by pyrosequencing showed the absence of methylation in all analyzed cell lines in the large CpG island upstream of exon 1C. In the second intron of promoter 2 (P2) a region was identified containing 4 CpG nucleotides for which differential methylation correlated with the PTHrP expression level. The functional importance of this control mechanism was confirmed by the ability of the demethylating agent 5'-azacytidine to induce PTHrP mRNA and iPTHrP protein expression in previously non-expressing cell lines and increase their production by metastatic NS2T2A1 cells. In particular, transcription from P2 was activated non-tumoral S1T3 cells upon treatment with 5'-azacytidine. Our findings support the hypothesis that the methylation status of specific CpG dinucleotides is the dominant mechanism involved in silencing of PTHrP expression rather than the overall methylation of the CpG island. Methylation of the PTHrP P2 is a potential marker of breast cancer progression and might be used to evaluate the metastatic potential of breast tumors.

Expression of some members of the cadherin family is reduced in several human tumors, and CDH13 (H-cadherin), located on chromosome 16q24.2-3, may function as a tumor suppressor gene. In human tumors, loss of expression of many tumor suppressor genes occurs by aberrant promoter region methylation. We examined the methylation status of the CDH13 promoter in breast and lung cancers and correlated it with mRNA expression using methylation-specific PCR and reverse transcription-PCR. Methylation was frequent in primary breast tumors (18 of 55, 33%) and cell lines (7 of 20, 35%). In lung cancers, methylation was present more frequently in non-small cell lung cancer tumors (18 of 42, 43%) and cell lines (15 of 30, 50%) than in small cell lung cancer cell lines (6 of 30, 20%; P = 0.03). Only the methylated or unmethylated forms of the gene were present in most (73 of 80, 91%) tumor cell lines. CDH13 expression was present in 24 of 30 (80%) of nonmethylated tumor lines. All 18 methylated lines tested lacked expression irrespective of whether the unmethylated form was present, confirming biallelic inactivation in methylated lines. Gene expression was restored in all five methylated cell lines tested after treatment with the demethylating agent 5'-aza-2-deoxycytidine. Our results demonstrate frequent aberrant methylation of CDH13 in breast and lung cancers accompanied by loss of gene expression, although expression may occasionally be lost by other mechanisms.. Expression of some members of the cadherin family is reduced in several human tumors, and CDH13 (H-cadherin), located on chromosome 16q24.2-3, may function as a tumor suppressor gene. In human tumors, loss of expression of many tumor suppressor genes occurs by aberrant promoter region methylation. We examined the methylation status of the CDH13 promoter in breast and lung cancers and correlated it with mRNA expression using methylation-specific PCR and reverse transcription-PCR. Methylation was frequent in primary breast tumors (18 of 55, 33%) and cell lines (7 of 20, 35%). In lung cancers, methylation was present more frequently in non-small cell lung cancer tumors (18 of 42, 43%) and cell lines (15 of 30, 50%) than in small cell lung cancer cell lines (6 of 30, 20%; P = 0.03). Only the methylated or unmethylated forms of the gene were present in most (73 of 80, 91%) tumor cell lines. CDH13 expression was present in 24 of 30 (80%) of nonmethylated tumor lines. All 18 methylated lines tested lacked expression irrespective of whether the unmethylated form was present, confirming biallelic inactivation in methylated lines. Gene expression was restored in all five methylated cell lines tested after treatment with the demethylating agent 5'-aza-2-deoxycytidine. Our results demonstrate frequent aberrant methylation of CDH13 in breast and lung cancers accompanied by loss of gene expression, although expression may occasionally be lost by other mechanisms.

AIMS: To investigate whether aberrant methylation of the ATM promoter or loss of the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs) may be the underlying causes of reduced ATM protein levels often seen in breast tumours. METHODS AND RESULTS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was used to determine the ATM promoter status and DNA-PKcs levels were measured by immunohistochemistry. None of the 74 invasive carcinomas (ICs) studied showed ATM promoter hypermethylation, whereas promoter methylation of CDKN2A/p16 (1.8%) and GSTP1 (15.8%) was detected. Of 92 ICs examined, 68 had reduced DNA-PKcs levels, supporting previous findings that alterations in double-strand break repair are associated with breast cancer pathogenesis. Although no association was found between the DNA-PKcs and ATM scores for the series of 92 tissues and 22/24 tissues with normal DNA-PKcs had reduced ATM, 29 tumours showed low expression of both DNA-PKcs and ATM compared with normal tissues. CONCLUSIONS: No evidence was found that the reduction in ATM protein levels seen in breast carcinoma is the result of epigenetic silencing. However, cross-regulation between DNA-PKcs and ATM may be a possible cause in a subset of tumours and warrants further investigation.. AIMS: To investigate whether aberrant methylation of the ATM promoter or loss of the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs) may be the underlying causes of reduced ATM protein levels often seen in breast tumours. METHODS AND RESULTS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was used to determine the ATM promoter status and DNA-PKcs levels were measured by immunohistochemistry. None of the 74 invasive carcinomas (ICs) studied showed ATM promoter hypermethylation, whereas promoter methylation of CDKN2A/p16 (1.8%) and GSTP1 (15.8%) was detected. Of 92 ICs examined, 68 had reduced DNA-PKcs levels, supporting previous findings that alterations in double-strand break repair are associated with breast cancer pathogenesis. Although no association was found between the DNA-PKcs and ATM scores for the series of 92 tissues and 22/24 tissues with normal DNA-PKcs had reduced ATM, 29 tumours showed low expression of both DNA-PKcs and ATM compared with normal tissues. CONCLUSIONS: No evidence was found that the reduction in ATM protein levels seen in breast carcinoma is the result of epigenetic silencing. However, cross-regulation between DNA-PKcs and ATM may be a possible cause in a subset of tumours and warrants further investigation.

Aberrant methylation of the CpG islands in promoter regions is one of the mechanisms for inactivation of tumor suppressor genes in many human cancers including breast carcinoma. In this study, we aimed to assess, by methylation-specific PCR, the CpG methylation pattern of the UCHL1 promoter in 94 sporadic and 44 hereditary breast cancers from Tunisian patients. The percentage of UCHL1 methylation was 67 % in sporadic and 82 % in hereditary breast cancer cases. In sporadic cases, UCHL1 methylation correlated with poor response to treatment (P = 0.042) and progesterone receptor status (P = 0.036), whereas in patients with hereditary predisposition, the only significant association was found with Her2 expression (P = 0.024). Moreover, in patients with sporadic breast cancer, the UCHL1 unmethylated pattern conferred a prolonged overall survival time in particular in the group of patients with advanced TNM stage of the disease (P log rank = 0.04). Aberrant CpG methylation of the UCHL1 promoter was significantly associated with transcriptional silencing of this tumor suppressor gene in sporadic breast cancer tissues (P = 0.001). On the other hand, the UCHL1 unmethylated pattern correlated with P53 positivity in primary sporadic tumors (P = 0.032), supporting the functional link between the two tumor suppressors in breast tumorigenesis.. Aberrant methylation of the CpG islands in promoter regions is one of the mechanisms for inactivation of tumor suppressor genes in many human cancers including breast carcinoma. In this study, we aimed to assess, by methylation-specific PCR, the CpG methylation pattern of the UCHL1 promoter in 94 sporadic and 44 hereditary breast cancers from Tunisian patients. The percentage of UCHL1 methylation was 67 % in sporadic and 82 % in hereditary breast cancer cases. In sporadic cases, UCHL1 methylation correlated with poor response to treatment (P = 0.042) and progesterone receptor status (P = 0.036), whereas in patients with hereditary predisposition, the only significant association was found with Her2 expression (P = 0.024). Moreover, in patients with sporadic breast cancer, the UCHL1 unmethylated pattern conferred a prolonged overall survival time in particular in the group of patients with advanced TNM stage of the disease (P log rank = 0.04). Aberrant CpG methylation of the UCHL1 promoter was significantly associated with transcriptional silencing of this tumor suppressor gene in sporadic breast cancer tissues (P = 0.001). On the other hand, the UCHL1 unmethylated pattern correlated with P53 positivity in primary sporadic tumors (P = 0.032), supporting the functional link between the two tumor suppressors in breast tumorigenesis.

DNA methylation of tumor suppressor gene promoters is the most frequent phenomenon leading to inactivation of function, consequently driving malignant cell transformation. Cyclin D2 is implicated in tumor suppression. In our study, we carried out the MSP assay to evaluation the methylation status at CpG islands in the cyclin D2 promoter in breast cancer cases from the Vietnamese population. The results showed that the frequency of methylation reached 62.1% (59 of 95 breast cancer tumors), but was low in non-cancer specimens at 10% (2 of 20 non-cancer specimens). Additionally, with an RR (relative risk) and OR (odd ratios) of 6.21 and 14.8, DNA hypermethylation of cyclin D2 increased the possibility of malignant transformation. Our results confirmed the cyclin D2 hypermethylation could be used as the potential biomarker which could be applied in prognosis and early diagnosis of Vietnamese breast cancer patients.. DNA methylation of tumor suppressor gene promoters is the most frequent phenomenon leading to inactivation of function, consequently driving malignant cell transformation. Cyclin D2 is implicated in tumor suppression. In our study, we carried out the MSP assay to evaluation the methylation status at CpG islands in the cyclin D2 promoter in breast cancer cases from the Vietnamese population. The results showed that the frequency of methylation reached 62.1% (59 of 95 breast cancer tumors), but was low in non-cancer specimens at 10% (2 of 20 non-cancer specimens). Additionally, with an RR (relative risk) and OR (odd ratios) of 6.21 and 14.8, DNA hypermethylation of cyclin D2 increased the possibility of malignant transformation. Our results confirmed the cyclin D2 hypermethylation could be used as the potential biomarker which could be applied in prognosis and early diagnosis of Vietnamese breast cancer patients.

Cancer cells are characterized by epigenetic dysregulation, including global genome hypomethylation, regional hypo- and hypermethylation, altered histone modifications, and disturbed genomic imprinting. Despite the long-established fact that global DNA hypomethylation is a common feature of tumors, very little is known about evolution of this and other epigenetic alterations during tumor progression. The present study was undertaken to characterize the status of epigenetic dysregulation in three human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-231(S30) that represent different stages of human breast cancer. Our data show that breast cancer cells are characterized by significant alterations in cellular epigenetic status compared to non- tumorigenic MCF-10-2A epithelial breast cells. Interestingly, more malignant MDA-MB- 231 human breast cancer cells have a more prominent loss of DNA methylation accompanied by altered expression of maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1, methyl-binding proteins MeCP2 and MBD2, decreased trimethylation of lysine 20 of histone H4 and hyperacetylation of histone H4 compared to MCF-7 cells. The decrease in trimethylation of lysine 20 of histone H4 in MDA-MB-231 cells was accompanied by diminished expression of Suv4-20h2 histone methyltransferase. The results of present study demonstrate that MDA-MB-231 cells have more extensive epigenenic alterations than MCF-7. These results demonstrate that human breast cancer cells are characterized by prominent epigenetic alterations which are associated with increased malignant properties of cancer cells. Such epigenetic dysregulation may contribute to and may be indicative of the formation of a more aggressive tumor phenotype during tumor progression.. Cancer cells are characterized by epigenetic dysregulation, including global genome hypomethylation, regional hypo- and hypermethylation, altered histone modifications, and disturbed genomic imprinting. Despite the long-established fact that global DNA hypomethylation is a common feature of tumors, very little is known about evolution of this and other epigenetic alterations during tumor progression. The present study was undertaken to characterize the status of epigenetic dysregulation in three human breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-231(S30) that represent different stages of human breast cancer. Our data show that breast cancer cells are characterized by significant alterations in cellular epigenetic status compared to non- tumorigenic MCF-10-2A epithelial breast cells. Interestingly, more malignant MDA-MB- 231 human breast cancer cells have a more prominent loss of DNA methylation accompanied by altered expression of maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1, methyl-binding proteins MeCP2 and MBD2, decreased trimethylation of lysine 20 of histone H4 and hyperacetylation of histone H4 compared to MCF-7 cells. The decrease in trimethylation of lysine 20 of histone H4 in MDA-MB-231 cells was accompanied by diminished expression of Suv4-20h2 histone methyltransferase. The results of present study demonstrate that MDA-MB-231 cells have more extensive epigenenic alterations than MCF-7. These results demonstrate that human breast cancer cells are characterized by prominent epigenetic alterations which are associated with increased malignant properties of cancer cells. Such epigenetic dysregulation may contribute to and may be indicative of the formation of a more aggressive tumor phenotype during tumor progression.

Aberrant DNA methylation is responsible for the epigenetic silencing of genes associated with tumourigenesis and progression of cancer. In this study, we assessed the methylation status of eight genes in 49 snap-frozen primary breast tumours. Epigenetic alterations of 8 genes were analysed with methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR) (DCR1, DAPK1, RASSF1A and DCR2) or methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting analysis (MS-HRM) (APC, MGMT, GSTP1 and PTEN). MS-HRM performance was validated by bisulfite pyrosequencing regarding the methylation levels of MGMT. Promoter methylation was observed in APC 54.34%, 40.4% DCR1, 37.5% DAPK1, 33.3% RASSF1A, 22.44% MGMT, 16.6% GSTP1, 6% PTEN and 0% DCR2 promoters, respectively. Interestingly, 37 out of 49 cases (75.5%) displayed aberrant promoter methylation in at least one gene. An association of MGMT promoter methylation with age and tumour grade was recorded. Moreover, a correlation with advanced T-category was elicited for GSTP1, RASSF1 and DAPK1 promoter methylation. Finally, concurrent methylation of several genes showed a marginal statistical relationship with N-category. We conclude that APC, DCR1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A promoter methylation represents a common event in breast cancer tumourigenesis. Our results suggest that GSTP1, RASSF1, DAPK1 and MGMT may be implicated in the acquisition of a more aggressive phenotype in breast cancer.. Aberrant DNA methylation is responsible for the epigenetic silencing of genes associated with tumourigenesis and progression of cancer. In this study, we assessed the methylation status of eight genes in 49 snap-frozen primary breast tumours. Epigenetic alterations of 8 genes were analysed with methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR) (DCR1, DAPK1, RASSF1A and DCR2) or methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting analysis (MS-HRM) (APC, MGMT, GSTP1 and PTEN). MS-HRM performance was validated by bisulfite pyrosequencing regarding the methylation levels of MGMT. Promoter methylation was observed in APC 54.34%, 40.4% DCR1, 37.5% DAPK1, 33.3% RASSF1A, 22.44% MGMT, 16.6% GSTP1, 6% PTEN and 0% DCR2 promoters, respectively. Interestingly, 37 out of 49 cases (75.5%) displayed aberrant promoter methylation in at least one gene. An association of MGMT promoter methylation with age and tumour grade was recorded. Moreover, a correlation with advanced T-category was elicited for GSTP1, RASSF1 and DAPK1 promoter methylation. Finally, concurrent methylation of several genes showed a marginal statistical relationship with N-category. We conclude that APC, DCR1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A promoter methylation represents a common event in breast cancer tumourigenesis. Our results suggest that GSTP1, RASSF1, DAPK1 and MGMT may be implicated in the acquisition of a more aggressive phenotype in breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to investigate the underlying mechanisms of MGP downregulation in chemoresistant ER+ breast cancer cells and its association with survival outcomes in breast cancer patients. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray data of dysregulated genes in chemoresistant ER+ breast cancer cells were searched in GEO datasets. MGP expression in breast cancer patients and its DNA methylation status were analyzed in TCGA database. MGP promoter methylation was assessed using Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) assay. The association between MGP expression and survival outcomes in different sub-types of breast cancer patients after systemic therapy was analyzed by data mining in Kaplan Meier plotter and in Breast Cancer Gene-Expression Miner Version 4.0 (bc-GenExMiner 4.0). RESULTS: MGP is significantly downregulated in MCF-7/ADR cells compared to the parental MCF-7 cells. MCF-7/ADR cells had a significantly higher level of methylation in MGP promoter than MCF-7 cells. Demethylation treatment significantly restored MGP expression at both mRNA and protein levels. High MGP expression is associated with better relapse-free survival (RFS) in luminal A and luminal B breast cancer patients, but the association was not observed in HER2+ and basal-like subtype breast cancer patients. High MGP expression was associated with significantly lower risk of any event (AE) and also lower risk of metastatic relapse (MR). Survival curve showed that high MGP expression was associated to both better AE-free survival and MR-free survival. CONCLUSIONS: MGP is downregulated due to promoter hypermethylation in chemoresistant ER+ breast cancer cells. High MGP expression may predict better survival outcomes among ER+ breast cancer patients.. OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to investigate the underlying mechanisms of MGP downregulation in chemoresistant ER+ breast cancer cells and its association with survival outcomes in breast cancer patients. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray data of dysregulated genes in chemoresistant ER+ breast cancer cells were searched in GEO datasets. MGP expression in breast cancer patients and its DNA methylation status were analyzed in TCGA database. MGP promoter methylation was assessed using Methylation-Specific PCR (MSP) assay. The association between MGP expression and survival outcomes in different sub-types of breast cancer patients after systemic therapy was analyzed by data mining in Kaplan Meier plotter and in Breast Cancer Gene-Expression Miner Version 4.0 (bc-GenExMiner 4.0). RESULTS: MGP is significantly downregulated in MCF-7/ADR cells compared to the parental MCF-7 cells. MCF-7/ADR cells had a significantly higher level of methylation in MGP promoter than MCF-7 cells. Demethylation treatment significantly restored MGP expression at both mRNA and protein levels. High MGP expression is associated with better relapse-free survival (RFS) in luminal A and luminal B breast cancer patients, but the association was not observed in HER2+ and basal-like subtype breast cancer patients. High MGP expression was associated with significantly lower risk of any event (AE) and also lower risk of metastatic relapse (MR). Survival curve showed that high MGP expression was associated to both better AE-free survival and MR-free survival. CONCLUSIONS: MGP is downregulated due to promoter hypermethylation in chemoresistant ER+ breast cancer cells. High MGP expression may predict better survival outcomes among ER+ breast cancer patients.

The Vimentin gene plays a pivotal role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and is known to be overexpressed in the prognostically poor basal-like breast cancer subtype. Recent studies have reported Vimentin DNA methylation in association with poor clinical outcomes in other solid tumors, but not in breast cancer. We therefore quantified Vimentin DNA methylation using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in breast tumors and matched normal pairs in association with gene expression and survival in a hospital-based study of breast cancer patients. Gene expression data via qRT-PCR in cell lines and oligomicroarray data from breast tissues were correlated with percent methylation in the Vimentin promoter. A threshold of 20 percent average methylation compared with matched normal pairs was set for bivariate and multivariate tests of association between methylation and tumor subtype, tumor histopathology, and survival. Vimentin was differentially methylated in luminal breast cancer cell lines, and in luminal A, luminal B, and HER2-enriched breast tumor subtypes, but was rare in basal-like cell lines and tumors. Increased methylation was strongly correlated with decreased mRNA expression in cell lines, and had a moderate inverse correlation in breast tumors. Vimentin methylation predicted poor overall survival independent of race, subtype, stage, nodal status, or metastatic disease and holds promise as a new prognostic biomarker for breast cancer patients.. The Vimentin gene plays a pivotal role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and is known to be overexpressed in the prognostically poor basal-like breast cancer subtype. Recent studies have reported Vimentin DNA methylation in association with poor clinical outcomes in other solid tumors, but not in breast cancer. We therefore quantified Vimentin DNA methylation using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in breast tumors and matched normal pairs in association with gene expression and survival in a hospital-based study of breast cancer patients. Gene expression data via qRT-PCR in cell lines and oligomicroarray data from breast tissues were correlated with percent methylation in the Vimentin promoter. A threshold of 20 percent average methylation compared with matched normal pairs was set for bivariate and multivariate tests of association between methylation and tumor subtype, tumor histopathology, and survival. Vimentin was differentially methylated in luminal breast cancer cell lines, and in luminal A, luminal B, and HER2-enriched breast tumor subtypes, but was rare in basal-like cell lines and tumors. Increased methylation was strongly correlated with decreased mRNA expression in cell lines, and had a moderate inverse correlation in breast tumors. Vimentin methylation predicted poor overall survival independent of race, subtype, stage, nodal status, or metastatic disease and holds promise as a new prognostic biomarker for breast cancer patients.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant expression of tumor suppressor genes may correspond to the abnormal cell development and tumorigenesis. Rbl2/p130, a member of retinoblastoma family of proteins, has growth suppressive properties. Numerous studies reported de-regulation of Rbl2/p130 in various types of cancer as a consequence of a number of genetic alterations. However, role of epigenetic mechanisms like DNA methylation in Rbl2/p130 expression remains elusive. METHODS: In the current study, 76 breast cancer tumors along with normal tissues (n = 76), blood (n = 76) of respective individuals and control blood (n = 50) were analyzed. Rbl2/p130 expression was analyzed by quantitative real time PCR (syber green method). Promoter methylation status was studied through methylation specific PCR of bisulfite converted genomic DNA. Data was analyzed using various statistical tests. RESULTS: We report significantly reduced Rbl2/p130 expression (P = 0.001) in tumors tissues as compared to control samples. Similarly, Rbl2/p130 expression varies with age and disease stages (P = 0.022), which suggest its involvement in tumor progression. Aberrant promoter methylation (Deltameth) was found in almost all the diseased samples and that was significantly different (P<0.001) with control samples. Similarly, methylation status varies significantly with tumor progression stages (P = 0.022). Hyper-methylation was observed at -1, +3, +15 and +75 of Rbl2/p130 promoter flanking around the TSS. Statistical analysis revealed that Rbl2/p130 expression negatively correlates to its promoter methylation (r = -0.412) in tumor tissues. Our results reflect an epigenetic regulation of Rbl2/p130 expression in breast cancer. This highlights the importance of Rbl2/p130 promoter methylation in breast cancer pathogenesis.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant expression of tumor suppressor genes may correspond to the abnormal cell development and tumorigenesis. Rbl2/p130, a member of retinoblastoma family of proteins, has growth suppressive properties. Numerous studies reported de-regulation of Rbl2/p130 in various types of cancer as a consequence of a number of genetic alterations. However, role of epigenetic mechanisms like DNA methylation in Rbl2/p130 expression remains elusive. METHODS: In the current study, 76 breast cancer tumors along with normal tissues (n = 76), blood (n = 76) of respective individuals and control blood (n = 50) were analyzed. Rbl2/p130 expression was analyzed by quantitative real time PCR (syber green method). Promoter methylation status was studied through methylation specific PCR of bisulfite converted genomic DNA. Data was analyzed using various statistical tests. RESULTS: We report significantly reduced Rbl2/p130 expression (P = 0.001) in tumors tissues as compared to control samples. Similarly, Rbl2/p130 expression varies with age and disease stages (P = 0.022), which suggest its involvement in tumor progression. Aberrant promoter methylation (Deltameth) was found in almost all the diseased samples and that was significantly different (P<0.001) with control samples. Similarly, methylation status varies significantly with tumor progression stages (P = 0.022). Hyper-methylation was observed at -1, +3, +15 and +75 of Rbl2/p130 promoter flanking around the TSS. Statistical analysis revealed that Rbl2/p130 expression negatively correlates to its promoter methylation (r = -0.412) in tumor tissues. Our results reflect an epigenetic regulation of Rbl2/p130 expression in breast cancer. This highlights the importance of Rbl2/p130 promoter methylation in breast cancer pathogenesis.

Epigenetic modifications introduce an additional layer of regulation that drastically expands the instructional capability of the human genome. The regulatory consequences of DNA methylation is context dependent; it can induce, enhance, and suppress gene expression, or have no effect on gene regulation. Therefore, it is essential to account for the genomic location of its occurrence and the protein factors it associates with to improve our understanding of its function and effects. Here, we use ENCODE ChIP-seq and DNase I hypersensitivity data, along with large-scale breast cancer genomic data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to computationally dissect the intricacies of DNA methylation in regulation of cancer transcriptomes. In particular, we identified a relationship between estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) activity and DNA methylation patterning in breast cancer. We found compelling evidence that methylation status of DNA sequences at ERalpha binding sites is tightly coupled with ERalpha activity. Furthermore, we predicted several transcription factors including FOXA1, GATA1, and SUZ12 to be associated with breast cancer by examining the methylation status of their binding sites in breast cancer. Lastly, we determine that methylated CpGs highly correlated with gene expression are enriched in regions 1kb or more downstream of TSSs, suggesting more significant regulatory roles for CpGs distal to gene TSSs. Our study provides novel insights into the role of ERalpha in breast cancers.. Epigenetic modifications introduce an additional layer of regulation that drastically expands the instructional capability of the human genome. The regulatory consequences of DNA methylation is context dependent; it can induce, enhance, and suppress gene expression, or have no effect on gene regulation. Therefore, it is essential to account for the genomic location of its occurrence and the protein factors it associates with to improve our understanding of its function and effects. Here, we use ENCODE ChIP-seq and DNase I hypersensitivity data, along with large-scale breast cancer genomic data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to computationally dissect the intricacies of DNA methylation in regulation of cancer transcriptomes. In particular, we identified a relationship between estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) activity and DNA methylation patterning in breast cancer. We found compelling evidence that methylation status of DNA sequences at ERalpha binding sites is tightly coupled with ERalpha activity. Furthermore, we predicted several transcription factors including FOXA1, GATA1, and SUZ12 to be associated with breast cancer by examining the methylation status of their binding sites in breast cancer. Lastly, we determine that methylated CpGs highly correlated with gene expression are enriched in regions 1kb or more downstream of TSSs, suggesting more significant regulatory roles for CpGs distal to gene TSSs. Our study provides novel insights into the role of ERalpha in breast cancers.

The regulatory architecture of breast cancer is extraordinarily complex and gene misregulation can occur at many levels, with transcriptional malfunction being a major cause. This dysfunctional process typically involves additional regulatory modulators including DNA methylation. Thus, the interplay between transcription factor (TF) binding and DNA methylation are two components of a cancer regulatory interactome presumed to display correlated signals. As proof of concept, we performed a systematic motif-based in silico analysis to infer all potential TFs that are involved in breast cancer prognosis through an association with DNA methylation changes. Using breast cancer DNA methylation and clinical data derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we carried out a systematic inference of TFs whose misregulation underlie different clinical subtypes of breast cancer. Our analysis identified TFs known to be associated with clinical outcomes of p53 and ER (estrogen receptor) subtypes of breast cancer, while also predicting new TFs that may also be involved. Furthermore, our results suggest that misregulation in breast cancer can be caused by the binding of alternative factors to the binding sites of TFs whose activity has been ablated. Overall, this study provides a comprehensive analysis that links DNA methylation to TF binding to patient prognosis.. The regulatory architecture of breast cancer is extraordinarily complex and gene misregulation can occur at many levels, with transcriptional malfunction being a major cause. This dysfunctional process typically involves additional regulatory modulators including DNA methylation. Thus, the interplay between transcription factor (TF) binding and DNA methylation are two components of a cancer regulatory interactome presumed to display correlated signals. As proof of concept, we performed a systematic motif-based in silico analysis to infer all potential TFs that are involved in breast cancer prognosis through an association with DNA methylation changes. Using breast cancer DNA methylation and clinical data derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we carried out a systematic inference of TFs whose misregulation underlie different clinical subtypes of breast cancer. Our analysis identified TFs known to be associated with clinical outcomes of p53 and ER (estrogen receptor) subtypes of breast cancer, while also predicting new TFs that may also be involved. Furthermore, our results suggest that misregulation in breast cancer can be caused by the binding of alternative factors to the binding sites of TFs whose activity has been ablated. Overall, this study provides a comprehensive analysis that links DNA methylation to TF binding to patient prognosis.

Multidrug resistance to anticancer drugs, which is often associated with enhanced expression of the ATPbinding cassette (ABC) transporter Pglycoprotein (encoded by the ABCB1 gene) may limit the effects of cancer therapy. Epigenetic regulation of ABCB1 expression may thus have a clinical impact. A detailed assessment of ABCB1 promoter methylation is of importance for predicting therapy outcome and prognosis. Thus, validated methods for the analysis of ABCB1 promoter methylation are urgently required. In the present study, highresolution melting (HRM) analysis of the CpG island regions covering the distal promoter of the ABCB1 gene was developed and compared with pyrosequencing. In addition, the clinical effects of the methylation status of the ABCB1 promoter were analyzed in patients with breast and ovarian carcinoma prior and subsequent to chemotherapy treatment. HRM analysis of ABCB1 methylation correlated with the results of pyrosequencing (P=0.001) demonstrating its analytical validity and utility. Hypermethylation of the analyzed ABCB1 promoter region was significantly correlated with low levels of the ABCB1 transcript in tumors from a subset of patients with breast and ovarian carcinoma prior to chemotherapy but not following treatment. Finally, high ABCB1 transcript levels were observed in tumors of patients with short progressionfree survival prior to chemotherapy. Our data suggest the existence of functional epigenetic changes in the ABCB1 gene with prognostic value in tumor tissues of patients with breast and ovarian carcinoma. The clinical importance of such changes should be further evaluated.. Multidrug resistance to anticancer drugs, which is often associated with enhanced expression of the ATPbinding cassette (ABC) transporter Pglycoprotein (encoded by the ABCB1 gene) may limit the effects of cancer therapy. Epigenetic regulation of ABCB1 expression may thus have a clinical impact. A detailed assessment of ABCB1 promoter methylation is of importance for predicting therapy outcome and prognosis. Thus, validated methods for the analysis of ABCB1 promoter methylation are urgently required. In the present study, highresolution melting (HRM) analysis of the CpG island regions covering the distal promoter of the ABCB1 gene was developed and compared with pyrosequencing. In addition, the clinical effects of the methylation status of the ABCB1 promoter were analyzed in patients with breast and ovarian carcinoma prior and subsequent to chemotherapy treatment. HRM analysis of ABCB1 methylation correlated with the results of pyrosequencing (P=0.001) demonstrating its analytical validity and utility. Hypermethylation of the analyzed ABCB1 promoter region was significantly correlated with low levels of the ABCB1 transcript in tumors from a subset of patients with breast and ovarian carcinoma prior to chemotherapy but not following treatment. Finally, high ABCB1 transcript levels were observed in tumors of patients with short progressionfree survival prior to chemotherapy. Our data suggest the existence of functional epigenetic changes in the ABCB1 gene with prognostic value in tumor tissues of patients with breast and ovarian carcinoma. The clinical importance of such changes should be further evaluated.

INTRODUCTION: p16(INK4A) is a tumor suppressor encoding the Cdk inhibitor protein, which acts to repress Cdk4/6 and pRb phosphorylation. p16(INK4A) gene can be inactivated by a variety of events, including promoter hypermethylation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate the methylation status of the p16(INK4A) gene in Iranian patients with breast carcinoma, promoter methylation was studied by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and restriction enzyme-related PCR (REP). In addition, p16(INK4A) promoter was analyzed by PCR-SSCP in order to detection of mutation and single nucleotide polymorphisms. RESULTS: Analysis of 70 patients by MPS and REP showed hypermethylation of p16(INK4A) promoter in 35.7% (25/70) and 40% (28/70) of samples, respectively. Comparison of the molecular data and pathological information of the samples suggested that p16(INK4A) gene might be inactivated at the early stages in breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Therefore, it could be suggested that hypermethylation of p16(INK4A) promoter is one of the epigenetic factors affecting the progress of sporadic breast carcinogenesis in Iranian patients.. INTRODUCTION: p16(INK4A) is a tumor suppressor encoding the Cdk inhibitor protein, which acts to repress Cdk4/6 and pRb phosphorylation. p16(INK4A) gene can be inactivated by a variety of events, including promoter hypermethylation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate the methylation status of the p16(INK4A) gene in Iranian patients with breast carcinoma, promoter methylation was studied by methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and restriction enzyme-related PCR (REP). In addition, p16(INK4A) promoter was analyzed by PCR-SSCP in order to detection of mutation and single nucleotide polymorphisms. RESULTS: Analysis of 70 patients by MPS and REP showed hypermethylation of p16(INK4A) promoter in 35.7% (25/70) and 40% (28/70) of samples, respectively. Comparison of the molecular data and pathological information of the samples suggested that p16(INK4A) gene might be inactivated at the early stages in breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Therefore, it could be suggested that hypermethylation of p16(INK4A) promoter is one of the epigenetic factors affecting the progress of sporadic breast carcinogenesis in Iranian patients.

Alterations of genetic and epigenetic features can provide important insights into the natural history of breast cancer. Although DNA methylation analysis is a rapidly developing field, a reproducible epigenetic blood-based assay for diagnosis and follow-up of breast cancer has yet to be successfully developed into a routine clinical test. The aim of this study was to review multiple serum DNA methylation assays and to highlight the value of those novel biomarkers in diagnosis, prognosis and prediction of therapeutic outcome. Serum is readily accessible for molecular diagnosis in all individuals from a peripheral blood sample. The list of hypermethylated genes in breast cancer is heterogeneous and no single gene is methylated in all breast cancer types. There is increasing evidence that a panel of epigenetic markers is essential to achieve a higher sensitivity and specificity in breast cancer detection. However, the reported percentages of methylation are highly variable, which can be partly explained by the different sensitivities and the different intra-/inter-assay coefficients of variability of the analysis methods. Moreover, there is a striking lack of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of the proposed biomarkers. Another point of criticism is the fact that 'normal' patterns of DNA methylation of some tumor suppressor and other cancer-related genes are influenced by several factors and are often poorly characterized. A relatively frequent methylation of those genes has been observed in high-risk asymptomatic women. Finally, there is a call for larger prospective cohort studies to determine methylation patterns during treatment and follow-up. Identification of patterns specific for a differential response to therapeutic interventions should be useful. Only in this way, it will be possible to evaluate the predictive and prognostic characteristics of those novel promising biomarkers.. Alterations of genetic and epigenetic features can provide important insights into the natural history of breast cancer. Although DNA methylation analysis is a rapidly developing field, a reproducible epigenetic blood-based assay for diagnosis and follow-up of breast cancer has yet to be successfully developed into a routine clinical test. The aim of this study was to review multiple serum DNA methylation assays and to highlight the value of those novel biomarkers in diagnosis, prognosis and prediction of therapeutic outcome. Serum is readily accessible for molecular diagnosis in all individuals from a peripheral blood sample. The list of hypermethylated genes in breast cancer is heterogeneous and no single gene is methylated in all breast cancer types. There is increasing evidence that a panel of epigenetic markers is essential to achieve a higher sensitivity and specificity in breast cancer detection. However, the reported percentages of methylation are highly variable, which can be partly explained by the different sensitivities and the different intra-/inter-assay coefficients of variability of the analysis methods. Moreover, there is a striking lack of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of the proposed biomarkers. Another point of criticism is the fact that 'normal' patterns of DNA methylation of some tumor suppressor and other cancer-related genes are influenced by several factors and are often poorly characterized. A relatively frequent methylation of those genes has been observed in high-risk asymptomatic women. Finally, there is a call for larger prospective cohort studies to determine methylation patterns during treatment and follow-up. Identification of patterns specific for a differential response to therapeutic interventions should be useful. Only in this way, it will be possible to evaluate the predictive and prognostic characteristics of those novel promising biomarkers.

BACKGROUND: In the present study, we determined the gene hypermethylation profiles of normal tissues adjacent to invasive breast carcinomas and investigated whether these are associated with the gene hypermethylation profiles of the corresponding primary breast tumors. METHODS: A quantitative methylation-specific PCR assay was used to analyze the DNA methylation status of 6 genes (DAPK, TWIST, HIN-1, RASSF1A, RARbeta2 and APC) in 9 normal breast tissue samples from unaffected women and in 56 paired cancerous and normal tissue samples from breast cancer patients. RESULTS: Normal tissue adjacent to breast cancer displayed statistically significant differences to unrelated normal breast tissues regarding the aberrant methylation of the RASSF1A (P = 0.03), RARbeta2 (P = 0.04) and APC (P = 0.04) genes. Although methylation ratios for all genes in normal tissues from cancer patients were significantly lower than in the cancerous tissue from the same patient (P < or = 0.01), in general, a clear correlation was observed between methylation ratios measured in both tissue types for all genes tested (P < 0.01). When analyzed as a categorical variable, there was a significant concordance between methylation changes in normal tissues and in the corresponding tumor for all genes tested but RASSF1A. Notably, in 73% of patients, at least one gene with an identical methylation change in cancerous and normal breast tissues was observed. CONCLUSIONS: Histologically normal breast tissues adjacent to breast tumors frequently exhibit methylation changes in multiple genes. These methylation changes may play a role in the earliest stages of the development of breast neoplasia.. BACKGROUND: In the present study, we determined the gene hypermethylation profiles of normal tissues adjacent to invasive breast carcinomas and investigated whether these are associated with the gene hypermethylation profiles of the corresponding primary breast tumors. METHODS: A quantitative methylation-specific PCR assay was used to analyze the DNA methylation status of 6 genes (DAPK, TWIST, HIN-1, RASSF1A, RARbeta2 and APC) in 9 normal breast tissue samples from unaffected women and in 56 paired cancerous and normal tissue samples from breast cancer patients. RESULTS: Normal tissue adjacent to breast cancer displayed statistically significant differences to unrelated normal breast tissues regarding the aberrant methylation of the RASSF1A (P = 0.03), RARbeta2 (P = 0.04) and APC (P = 0.04) genes. Although methylation ratios for all genes in normal tissues from cancer patients were significantly lower than in the cancerous tissue from the same patient (P < or = 0.01), in general, a clear correlation was observed between methylation ratios measured in both tissue types for all genes tested (P < 0.01). When analyzed as a categorical variable, there was a significant concordance between methylation changes in normal tissues and in the corresponding tumor for all genes tested but RASSF1A. Notably, in 73% of patients, at least one gene with an identical methylation change in cancerous and normal breast tissues was observed. CONCLUSIONS: Histologically normal breast tissues adjacent to breast tumors frequently exhibit methylation changes in multiple genes. These methylation changes may play a role in the earliest stages of the development of breast neoplasia.

Aberrant methylation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene promoter occurs in about 40% of breast tumours and has been correlated with reduced APC protein levels. To what extent epigenetic alterations of the APC gene may differ according to specific breast cancer phenotypes, remains to be elucidated. Our aim was to explore the role of APC methylation in the inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) phenotype. The status of APC gene promoter hypermethylation was investigated in DNA from normal breast tissues, IBC and non-IBC by both conventional and real-time quantitative methylation-specific PCR (MSP). APC methylation levels were compared with APC mRNA and protein levels. Hypermethylation of the APC gene promoter was present in 71% of IBC samples (n=21) and 43% of non-IBC samples (n=30) by conventional MSP (P=0.047). The APC gene also showed an increased frequency of high methylation levels in IBC (in 74% of cases, n=19) vs non-IBC (in 46% of cases, n=35) using a qMSP assay (P=0.048). We observed no significant association between APC methylation levels by qMSP and APC mRNA or protein expression levels. In conclusion, for the first time, we report the association of aberrant methylation of the APC gene promoter with the IBC phenotype, which might be of biological and clinical importance.. Aberrant methylation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene promoter occurs in about 40% of breast tumours and has been correlated with reduced APC protein levels. To what extent epigenetic alterations of the APC gene may differ according to specific breast cancer phenotypes, remains to be elucidated. Our aim was to explore the role of APC methylation in the inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) phenotype. The status of APC gene promoter hypermethylation was investigated in DNA from normal breast tissues, IBC and non-IBC by both conventional and real-time quantitative methylation-specific PCR (MSP). APC methylation levels were compared with APC mRNA and protein levels. Hypermethylation of the APC gene promoter was present in 71% of IBC samples (n=21) and 43% of non-IBC samples (n=30) by conventional MSP (P=0.047). The APC gene also showed an increased frequency of high methylation levels in IBC (in 74% of cases, n=19) vs non-IBC (in 46% of cases, n=35) using a qMSP assay (P=0.048). We observed no significant association between APC methylation levels by qMSP and APC mRNA or protein expression levels. In conclusion, for the first time, we report the association of aberrant methylation of the APC gene promoter with the IBC phenotype, which might be of biological and clinical importance.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal DNA methylation is well established for breast cancer and contributes to its progression by silencing tumor suppressor genes. DNA methylation profiling platforms might provide an alternative approach to expression microarrays for accurate breast tumor subtyping. We sought to determine whether the distinction of the inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) phenotype from the non-IBC phenotype by transcriptomics could be sustained by methylomics. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed methylation profiling on a cohort of IBC (N = 19) and non-IBC (N = 43) samples using the Illumina Infinium Methylation Assay. These results were correlated with gene expression profiles. Methylation values allowed separation of breast tumor samples into high and low methylation groups. This separation was significantly related to DNMT3B mRNA levels. The high methylation group was enriched for breast tumor samples from patients with distant metastasis and poor prognosis, as predicted by the 70-gene prognostic signature. Furthermore, this tumor group tended to be enriched for IBC samples (54% vs. 24%) and samples with a high genomic grade index (67% vs. 38%). A set of 16 CpG loci (14 genes) correctly classified 97% of samples into the low or high methylation group. Differentially methylated genes appeared to be mainly related to focal adhesion, cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, Wnt signaling pathway, chemokine signaling pathways and metabolic processes. Comparison of IBC with non-IBC led to the identification of only four differentially methylated genes (TJP3, MOGAT2, NTSR2 and AGT). A significant correlation between methylation values and gene expression was shown for 4,981 of 6,605 (75%) genes. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: A subset of clinical samples of breast cancer was characterized by high methylation levels, which coincided with increased DNMT3B expression. Furthermore, an association was observed with molecular signatures indicative of poor patient prognosis. The results of the current study also suggest that aberrant DNA methylation is not the main force driving the molecular biology of IBC.. BACKGROUND: Abnormal DNA methylation is well established for breast cancer and contributes to its progression by silencing tumor suppressor genes. DNA methylation profiling platforms might provide an alternative approach to expression microarrays for accurate breast tumor subtyping. We sought to determine whether the distinction of the inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) phenotype from the non-IBC phenotype by transcriptomics could be sustained by methylomics. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed methylation profiling on a cohort of IBC (N = 19) and non-IBC (N = 43) samples using the Illumina Infinium Methylation Assay. These results were correlated with gene expression profiles. Methylation values allowed separation of breast tumor samples into high and low methylation groups. This separation was significantly related to DNMT3B mRNA levels. The high methylation group was enriched for breast tumor samples from patients with distant metastasis and poor prognosis, as predicted by the 70-gene prognostic signature. Furthermore, this tumor group tended to be enriched for IBC samples (54% vs. 24%) and samples with a high genomic grade index (67% vs. 38%). A set of 16 CpG loci (14 genes) correctly classified 97% of samples into the low or high methylation group. Differentially methylated genes appeared to be mainly related to focal adhesion, cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, Wnt signaling pathway, chemokine signaling pathways and metabolic processes. Comparison of IBC with non-IBC led to the identification of only four differentially methylated genes (TJP3, MOGAT2, NTSR2 and AGT). A significant correlation between methylation values and gene expression was shown for 4,981 of 6,605 (75%) genes. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: A subset of clinical samples of breast cancer was characterized by high methylation levels, which coincided with increased DNMT3B expression. Furthermore, an association was observed with molecular signatures indicative of poor patient prognosis. The results of the current study also suggest that aberrant DNA methylation is not the main force driving the molecular biology of IBC.

Panel-based next generation sequencing (NGS) is currently preferred over whole exome sequencing (WES) for diagnosis of familial breast cancer, due to interpretation challenges caused by variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS). There is also no consensus on the selection criteria for WES. In this study, a pathology-supported genetic testing (PSGT) approach was used to select two BRCA1/2 mutation-negative breast cancer patients from the same family for WES. Homozygosity for the MTHFR 677 C>T mutation detected during this PSGT pre-screen step was considered insufficient to cause bilateral breast cancer in the index case and her daughter diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer (<30 years). Extended genetic testing using WES identified the RAD50 R385C missense mutation in both cases. This rare variant with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of <0.001 was classified as a VUS after exclusion in an affected cousin and extended genotyping in 164 unrelated breast cancer patients and 160 controls. Detection of functional polymorphisms (MAF > 5%) in the folate pathway in all three affected family members is consistent with inheritance of the luminal-type breast cancer in the family. PSGT assisted with the decision to pursue extended genetic testing and facilitated clinical interpretation of WES aimed at reduction of recurrence risk.. Panel-based next generation sequencing (NGS) is currently preferred over whole exome sequencing (WES) for diagnosis of familial breast cancer, due to interpretation challenges caused by variants of uncertain clinical significance (VUS). There is also no consensus on the selection criteria for WES. In this study, a pathology-supported genetic testing (PSGT) approach was used to select two BRCA1/2 mutation-negative breast cancer patients from the same family for WES. Homozygosity for the MTHFR 677 C>T mutation detected during this PSGT pre-screen step was considered insufficient to cause bilateral breast cancer in the index case and her daughter diagnosed with early-onset breast cancer (<30 years). Extended genetic testing using WES identified the RAD50 R385C missense mutation in both cases. This rare variant with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of <0.001 was classified as a VUS after exclusion in an affected cousin and extended genotyping in 164 unrelated breast cancer patients and 160 controls. Detection of functional polymorphisms (MAF > 5%) in the folate pathway in all three affected family members is consistent with inheritance of the luminal-type breast cancer in the family. PSGT assisted with the decision to pursue extended genetic testing and facilitated clinical interpretation of WES aimed at reduction of recurrence risk.

BACKGROUND: Molecular pathways determining the malignant potential of premalignant breast lesions remain unknown. In this study, alterations in DNA methylation levels were monitored during benign, premalignant and malignant stages of ductal breast cancer development. METHODS: To study epigenetic events during breast cancer development, four genomic biomarkers (Methylated-IN-Tumour (MINT)17, MINT31, RARbeta2 and RASSF1A) shown to represent DNA hypermethylation in tumours were selected. Laser capture microdissection was employed to isolate DNA from breast lesions, including normal breast epithelia (n=52), ductal hyperplasia (n=23), atypical ductal hyperplasia (n=31), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS, n=95) and AJCC stage I invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC, n=34). Methylation Index (MI) for each biomarker was calculated based on methylated and unmethylated copy numbers measured by Absolute Quantitative Assessment Of Methylated Alleles (AQAMA). Trends in MI by developmental stage were analysed. RESULTS: Methylation levels increased significantly during the progressive stages of breast cancer development; P-values are 0.0012, 0.0003, 0.012, <0.0001 and <0.0001 for MINT17, MINT31, RARbeta2, RASSF1A and combined biomarkers, respectively. In both DCIS and IDC, hypermethylation was associated with unfavourable characteristics. CONCLUSION: DNA hypermethylation of selected biomarkers occurs early in breast cancer development, and may present a predictor of malignant potential.. BACKGROUND: Molecular pathways determining the malignant potential of premalignant breast lesions remain unknown. In this study, alterations in DNA methylation levels were monitored during benign, premalignant and malignant stages of ductal breast cancer development. METHODS: To study epigenetic events during breast cancer development, four genomic biomarkers (Methylated-IN-Tumour (MINT)17, MINT31, RARbeta2 and RASSF1A) shown to represent DNA hypermethylation in tumours were selected. Laser capture microdissection was employed to isolate DNA from breast lesions, including normal breast epithelia (n=52), ductal hyperplasia (n=23), atypical ductal hyperplasia (n=31), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS, n=95) and AJCC stage I invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC, n=34). Methylation Index (MI) for each biomarker was calculated based on methylated and unmethylated copy numbers measured by Absolute Quantitative Assessment Of Methylated Alleles (AQAMA). Trends in MI by developmental stage were analysed. RESULTS: Methylation levels increased significantly during the progressive stages of breast cancer development; P-values are 0.0012, 0.0003, 0.012, <0.0001 and <0.0001 for MINT17, MINT31, RARbeta2, RASSF1A and combined biomarkers, respectively. In both DCIS and IDC, hypermethylation was associated with unfavourable characteristics. CONCLUSION: DNA hypermethylation of selected biomarkers occurs early in breast cancer development, and may present a predictor of malignant potential.

Breast cancer patients with similar clinical stage may experience different disease outcomes. Aberrant DNA methylation of primary breast tumors can have impact on the clinical outcome. This study aimed to assess clinical utility of tumor-specific methylated sequences (MINT17, 31) and tumor-related gene (RARbeta2) methylation classification in primary breast tumors. Absolute quantitative assessment of methylated alleles (AQAMA) was used to determine the methylation index (MI) of MINT17, MINT31, and RARss2 in 242 primary tumors of early stage breast cancer patients. Patients were classified into three methylation groups: meth-N, with normal methylation levels of all biomarkers; meth-L, with one biomarker hypermethylation; and meth-H, with hypermethylation of >1 biomarker. Disease outcome of methylation groups was compared during follow-up. MI of all biomarkers was successfully obtained in 237 tumors of which 79 (33%) were classified as meth-N, 86 (36%) as meth-L, and 72 (30%) as meth-H. Meth-H status was a risk factor for distant recurrence (DR) (log-rank P = 0.007) and shorter disease-free survival (DFS) (log-rank P = 0.039). Methylation classification had strongest prognostic value for patients with ER-negative tumors. In multivariate analysis (n = 222), ER-negative meth-H patients had a 4.1-fold increased risk of DR (95% CI 1.80-9.59; meth-N HR 1.0, P = 0.001), a 4.2-fold increased risk of overall recurrence (OR) (95% CI 1.88-9.47; meth-N HR 1.0, P = 0.001), and a 3.1-fold shorter DFS (95% CI 1.57-5.98; meth-N HR 1.0, P = 0.003). Methylation classification of primary breast cancer is an independent prognostic factor for disease outcome in patients with ER-negative tumors. The study's findings will have to be confirmed in an independent dataset.. Breast cancer patients with similar clinical stage may experience different disease outcomes. Aberrant DNA methylation of primary breast tumors can have impact on the clinical outcome. This study aimed to assess clinical utility of tumor-specific methylated sequences (MINT17, 31) and tumor-related gene (RARbeta2) methylation classification in primary breast tumors. Absolute quantitative assessment of methylated alleles (AQAMA) was used to determine the methylation index (MI) of MINT17, MINT31, and RARss2 in 242 primary tumors of early stage breast cancer patients. Patients were classified into three methylation groups: meth-N, with normal methylation levels of all biomarkers; meth-L, with one biomarker hypermethylation; and meth-H, with hypermethylation of >1 biomarker. Disease outcome of methylation groups was compared during follow-up. MI of all biomarkers was successfully obtained in 237 tumors of which 79 (33%) were classified as meth-N, 86 (36%) as meth-L, and 72 (30%) as meth-H. Meth-H status was a risk factor for distant recurrence (DR) (log-rank P = 0.007) and shorter disease-free survival (DFS) (log-rank P = 0.039). Methylation classification had strongest prognostic value for patients with ER-negative tumors. In multivariate analysis (n = 222), ER-negative meth-H patients had a 4.1-fold increased risk of DR (95% CI 1.80-9.59; meth-N HR 1.0, P = 0.001), a 4.2-fold increased risk of overall recurrence (OR) (95% CI 1.88-9.47; meth-N HR 1.0, P = 0.001), and a 3.1-fold shorter DFS (95% CI 1.57-5.98; meth-N HR 1.0, P = 0.003). Methylation classification of primary breast cancer is an independent prognostic factor for disease outcome in patients with ER-negative tumors. The study's findings will have to be confirmed in an independent dataset.

Inactivation of the tumor suppressor E-cadherin is an important event during breast tumorigenesis, as its decreased expression is linked to aggressiveness and metastasis. However, the relationship between the different modes of E-cadherin inactivation (mutation versus promotor hypermethylation) and breast cancer cell behavior is incompletely understood. The high correlation between E-cadherin inactivation status and cell morphology in vitro suggests different biological roles for the two inactivation modes during breast tumorigenesis. Because E-cadherin has been linked to cell invasion and metastasis, and cell motility is a crucial prerequisite to form metastases, we here compared the cell motility capacities of breast cancer cell lines with known E-cadherin status. Using barrier migration assays and time-lapse microscopy, we analyzed the migratory capacity of nine well-characterized human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, T47D, BT549, MPE600, CAMA-1, SUM159PT, SUM52PE, and SK-BR-3). This subset was chosen based on E-cadherin gene status (wild-type, mutated, and promotor hypermethylated): three cell lines of each group. In addition, cell proliferation assays were performed for all conditions, to dissect migratory from proliferative effects. In this study, we demonstrate an overt association between the mode of E-cadherin inactivation and cell migration. Promotor hypermethylated E-cadherin cell lines showed a higher migration capacity, while cell lines with mutated E-cadherin were less motile compared to wild-type E-cadherin cell lines. Migration induction by fibronectin and basic fibroblast growth factor did not alter the cell motility association differences. Cell proliferation assays showed that the associations found were not caused by proliferation differences. Inhibition and overexpression of E-cadherin as well as DNA demethylation confirmed the relationship between E-cadherin and breast cancer cell motility. Our results demonstrate an association between the mode of E-cadherin inactivation and migration of breast cancer cells, which justifies more detailed research on the role of E-cadherin inactivation in cell migration and metastasis.. Inactivation of the tumor suppressor E-cadherin is an important event during breast tumorigenesis, as its decreased expression is linked to aggressiveness and metastasis. However, the relationship between the different modes of E-cadherin inactivation (mutation versus promotor hypermethylation) and breast cancer cell behavior is incompletely understood. The high correlation between E-cadherin inactivation status and cell morphology in vitro suggests different biological roles for the two inactivation modes during breast tumorigenesis. Because E-cadherin has been linked to cell invasion and metastasis, and cell motility is a crucial prerequisite to form metastases, we here compared the cell motility capacities of breast cancer cell lines with known E-cadherin status. Using barrier migration assays and time-lapse microscopy, we analyzed the migratory capacity of nine well-characterized human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, MCF-7, T47D, BT549, MPE600, CAMA-1, SUM159PT, SUM52PE, and SK-BR-3). This subset was chosen based on E-cadherin gene status (wild-type, mutated, and promotor hypermethylated): three cell lines of each group. In addition, cell proliferation assays were performed for all conditions, to dissect migratory from proliferative effects. In this study, we demonstrate an overt association between the mode of E-cadherin inactivation and cell migration. Promotor hypermethylated E-cadherin cell lines showed a higher migration capacity, while cell lines with mutated E-cadherin were less motile compared to wild-type E-cadherin cell lines. Migration induction by fibronectin and basic fibroblast growth factor did not alter the cell motility association differences. Cell proliferation assays showed that the associations found were not caused by proliferation differences. Inhibition and overexpression of E-cadherin as well as DNA demethylation confirmed the relationship between E-cadherin and breast cancer cell motility. Our results demonstrate an association between the mode of E-cadherin inactivation and migration of breast cancer cells, which justifies more detailed research on the role of E-cadherin inactivation in cell migration and metastasis.

BACKGROUND: Interest in the potential of DNA methylation in peripheral blood as a biomarker of cancer risk is increasing. We aimed to assess whether epigenome-wide DNA methylation measured in peripheral blood samples obtained before onset of the disease is associated with increased risk of breast cancer. We report on three independent prospective nested case-control studies from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC-Italy; n = 162 matched case-control pairs), the Norwegian Women and Cancer study (NOWAC; n = 168 matched pairs), and the Breakthrough Generations Study (BGS; n = 548 matched pairs). We used the Illumina 450k array to measure methylation in the EPIC and NOWAC cohorts. Whole-genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) was performed on the BGS cohort using pooled DNA samples, combined to reach 50x coverage across ~16 million CpG sites in the genome including 450k array CpG sites. Mean beta values over all probes were calculated as a measurement for epigenome-wide methylation. RESULTS: In EPIC, we found that high epigenome-wide methylation was associated with lower risk of breast cancer (odds ratio (OR) per 1 SD = 0.61, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.47-0.80; -0.2 % average difference in epigenome-wide methylation for cases and controls). Specifically, this was observed in gene bodies (OR = 0.51, 95 % CI 0.38-0.69) but not in gene promoters (OR = 0.92, 95 % CI 0.64-1.32). The association was not replicated in NOWAC (OR = 1.03 95 % CI 0.81-1.30). The reasons for heterogeneity across studies are unclear. However, data from the BGS cohort was consistent with epigenome-wide hypomethylation in breast cancer cases across the overlapping 450k probe sites (difference in average epigenome-wide methylation in case and control DNA pools = -0.2 %). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that epigenome-wide hypomethylation of DNA from pre-diagnostic blood samples may be predictive of breast cancer risk and may thus be useful as a clinical biomarker.. BACKGROUND: Interest in the potential of DNA methylation in peripheral blood as a biomarker of cancer risk is increasing. We aimed to assess whether epigenome-wide DNA methylation measured in peripheral blood samples obtained before onset of the disease is associated with increased risk of breast cancer. We report on three independent prospective nested case-control studies from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC-Italy; n = 162 matched case-control pairs), the Norwegian Women and Cancer study (NOWAC; n = 168 matched pairs), and the Breakthrough Generations Study (BGS; n = 548 matched pairs). We used the Illumina 450k array to measure methylation in the EPIC and NOWAC cohorts. Whole-genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) was performed on the BGS cohort using pooled DNA samples, combined to reach 50x coverage across ~16 million CpG sites in the genome including 450k array CpG sites. Mean beta values over all probes were calculated as a measurement for epigenome-wide methylation. RESULTS: In EPIC, we found that high epigenome-wide methylation was associated with lower risk of breast cancer (odds ratio (OR) per 1 SD = 0.61, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.47-0.80; -0.2 % average difference in epigenome-wide methylation for cases and controls). Specifically, this was observed in gene bodies (OR = 0.51, 95 % CI 0.38-0.69) but not in gene promoters (OR = 0.92, 95 % CI 0.64-1.32). The association was not replicated in NOWAC (OR = 1.03 95 % CI 0.81-1.30). The reasons for heterogeneity across studies are unclear. However, data from the BGS cohort was consistent with epigenome-wide hypomethylation in breast cancer cases across the overlapping 450k probe sites (difference in average epigenome-wide methylation in case and control DNA pools = -0.2 %). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that epigenome-wide hypomethylation of DNA from pre-diagnostic blood samples may be predictive of breast cancer risk and may thus be useful as a clinical biomarker.

We have recently characterized ITIH5 as a new extracellular matrix protein that exhibits clear expression loss in a variety of human tumour entities, including breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to decipher the molecular cause of ITIH5 expression loss in breast cancer and to learn more about the possible role of this molecule in cancer diseases. ITIH5 protein expression was found to be strongly reduced in 42% of invasive breast carcinomas-interestingly, with significant association with poor patient outcome. ITIH5 promoter methylation was frequently detected in breast cell lines and in primary carcinomas (40%), and it was functionally correlated with loss of ITIH5 mRNA expression. Moreover, ITIH5 promoter methylation was also significantly associated with poor clinical patient outcome and also with the occurrence of lymph node and distant metastases. In conclusion, we propose that ITIH5 may represent a novel metastasis repressor in human breast cancer. Both ITIH5 protein expression and ITIH5 promoter methylation may serve as prognostic biomarkers, thereby helping improve clinical patient outcome.. We have recently characterized ITIH5 as a new extracellular matrix protein that exhibits clear expression loss in a variety of human tumour entities, including breast cancer. The aim of the present study was to decipher the molecular cause of ITIH5 expression loss in breast cancer and to learn more about the possible role of this molecule in cancer diseases. ITIH5 protein expression was found to be strongly reduced in 42% of invasive breast carcinomas-interestingly, with significant association with poor patient outcome. ITIH5 promoter methylation was frequently detected in breast cell lines and in primary carcinomas (40%), and it was functionally correlated with loss of ITIH5 mRNA expression. Moreover, ITIH5 promoter methylation was also significantly associated with poor clinical patient outcome and also with the occurrence of lymph node and distant metastases. In conclusion, we propose that ITIH5 may represent a novel metastasis repressor in human breast cancer. Both ITIH5 protein expression and ITIH5 promoter methylation may serve as prognostic biomarkers, thereby helping improve clinical patient outcome.

Both appropriate DNA methylation and histone modifications play a crucial role in the maintenance of normal cell function and cellular identity. In cancerous cells these "epigenetic belts" become massively perturbed, leading to significant changes in expression profiles which confer advantage to the development of a malignant phenotype. DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are the enzymes responsible for setting up and maintaining DNA methylation patterns in eukaryotic cells. Intriguingly, DNMTs were found to be overexpressed in cancerous cells, which is believed to partly explain the hypermethylation phenomenon commonly observed in tumors. However, several lines of evidence indicate that further layers of gene regulation are critical coordinators of DNMT expression, catalytic activity and target specificity. Splice variants of DNMT transcripts have been detected which seem to modulate methyltransferase activity. Also, the DNMT mRNA 3'UTR as well as the coding sequence harbors multiple binding sites for trans-acting factors guiding post-transcriptional regulation and transcript stabilization. Moreover, microRNAs targeting DNMT transcripts have recently been discovered in normal cells, yet expression of these microRNAs was found to be diminished in breast cancer tissues. In this review we summarize the current knowledge on mechanisms which potentially lead to the establishment of a DNA hypermethylome in cancer cells.. Both appropriate DNA methylation and histone modifications play a crucial role in the maintenance of normal cell function and cellular identity. In cancerous cells these "epigenetic belts" become massively perturbed, leading to significant changes in expression profiles which confer advantage to the development of a malignant phenotype. DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b are the enzymes responsible for setting up and maintaining DNA methylation patterns in eukaryotic cells. Intriguingly, DNMTs were found to be overexpressed in cancerous cells, which is believed to partly explain the hypermethylation phenomenon commonly observed in tumors. However, several lines of evidence indicate that further layers of gene regulation are critical coordinators of DNMT expression, catalytic activity and target specificity. Splice variants of DNMT transcripts have been detected which seem to modulate methyltransferase activity. Also, the DNMT mRNA 3'UTR as well as the coding sequence harbors multiple binding sites for trans-acting factors guiding post-transcriptional regulation and transcript stabilization. Moreover, microRNAs targeting DNMT transcripts have recently been discovered in normal cells, yet expression of these microRNAs was found to be diminished in breast cancer tissues. In this review we summarize the current knowledge on mechanisms which potentially lead to the establishment of a DNA hypermethylome in cancer cells.

The canonical Wnt signalling pathway plays a key role during embryogenesis and defects in this pathway have been implicated in the pathogenesis of various types of tumours, including breast cancer. The gene for secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) encodes a soluble Wnt antagonist and is located in a chromosomal region (8p22-p12) that is often deleted in breast cancer. In colon, lung, bladder and ovarian cancer SFRP1 expression is frequently inactivated by promoter methylation. We have previously shown that loss of SFRP1 protein expression is a common event in breast tumours that is associated with poor overall survival in patients with early breast cancer. To investigate the cause of SFRP1 loss in breast cancer, we performed mutation, methylation and expression analysis in human primary breast tumours and breast cell lines. No SFRP1 gene mutations were detected. However, promoter methylation of SFRP1 was frequently observed in both primary breast cancer (61%, n=130) and cell lines analysed by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). We found a tight correlation (P<0.001) between methylation and loss of SFRP1 expression in primary breast cancer tissue. SFRP1 expression was restored after treatment of tumour cell lines with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Most interestingly, SFRP1 promoter methylation was an independent factor for adverse patient survival in Kaplan-Meier analysis. Our results indicate that promoter hypermethylation is the predominant mechanism of SFRP1 gene silencing in human breast cancer and that SFRP1 gene inactivation in breast cancer is associated with unfavourable prognosis.. The canonical Wnt signalling pathway plays a key role during embryogenesis and defects in this pathway have been implicated in the pathogenesis of various types of tumours, including breast cancer. The gene for secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) encodes a soluble Wnt antagonist and is located in a chromosomal region (8p22-p12) that is often deleted in breast cancer. In colon, lung, bladder and ovarian cancer SFRP1 expression is frequently inactivated by promoter methylation. We have previously shown that loss of SFRP1 protein expression is a common event in breast tumours that is associated with poor overall survival in patients with early breast cancer. To investigate the cause of SFRP1 loss in breast cancer, we performed mutation, methylation and expression analysis in human primary breast tumours and breast cell lines. No SFRP1 gene mutations were detected. However, promoter methylation of SFRP1 was frequently observed in both primary breast cancer (61%, n=130) and cell lines analysed by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). We found a tight correlation (P<0.001) between methylation and loss of SFRP1 expression in primary breast cancer tissue. SFRP1 expression was restored after treatment of tumour cell lines with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Most interestingly, SFRP1 promoter methylation was an independent factor for adverse patient survival in Kaplan-Meier analysis. Our results indicate that promoter hypermethylation is the predominant mechanism of SFRP1 gene silencing in human breast cancer and that SFRP1 gene inactivation in breast cancer is associated with unfavourable prognosis.

BACKGROUND: Secreted Wnt signaling antagonists have recently been described as frequent targets of epigenetic inactivation in human tumor entities. Since gene silencing of certain Wnt antagonists was found to be correlated with adverse patient survival in cancer, we aimed at investigating a potential prognostic impact of the two Wnt antagonizing molecules WIF1 and DKK3 in breast cancer, which are frequently silenced by promoter methylation in this disease. METHODS: WIF1 and DKK3 promoter methylation were assessed by methylation-specific PCR with bisulfite-converted DNA from 19 normal breast tissues and 150 primary breast carcinomas. Promoter methylation was interpreted in a qualitative, binary fashion. Statistical evaluations included two-sided Fisher's exact tests, univariate log-rank tests of Kaplan-Meier curves as well as multivariate Cox regression analyses. RESULTS: WIF1 and DKK3 promoter methylation were detected in 63.3% (95/150) and 61.3% (92/150) of breast carcinoma samples, respectively. In normal breast tissues, WIF1 methylation was present in 0% (0/19) and DKK3 methylation in 5.3% (1/19) of samples. In breast carcinomas, WIF1 methylation was significantly associated with methylation of DKK3 (p = 0.009). Methylation of either gene was not associated with clinicopathological parameters, except for DKK3 methylation being associated with patient age (p = 0.007). In univariate analysis, WIF1 methylation was not associated with clinical patient outcome. In contrast, DKK3 methylation was a prognostic factor in patient overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS). Estimated OS rates after 10 years were 54% for patients with DKK3-methylated tumors, in contrast to patients without DKK3 methylation in the tumor, who had a favorable 97% OS after 10 years (p < 0.001). Likewise, DFS at 10 years for patients harboring DKK3 methylation in the tumor was 58%, compared with 78% for patients with unmethylated DKK3 (p = 0.037). Multivariate analyses revealed that DKK3 methylation was an independent prognostic factor predicting poor OS (hazard ratio (HR): 14.4; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.9-111.6; p = 0.011), and short DFS (HR: 2.5; 95% CI: 1.0-6.0; p = 0.047) in breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Although the Wnt antagonist genes WIF1 and DKK3 show a very similar frequency of promoter methylation in human breast cancer, only DKK3 methylation proves as a novel prognostic marker potentially useful in the clinical management of this disease.. BACKGROUND: Secreted Wnt signaling antagonists have recently been described as frequent targets of epigenetic inactivation in human tumor entities. Since gene silencing of certain Wnt antagonists was found to be correlated with adverse patient survival in cancer, we aimed at investigating a potential prognostic impact of the two Wnt antagonizing molecules WIF1 and DKK3 in breast cancer, which are frequently silenced by promoter methylation in this disease. METHODS: WIF1 and DKK3 promoter methylation were assessed by methylation-specific PCR with bisulfite-converted DNA from 19 normal breast tissues and 150 primary breast carcinomas. Promoter methylation was interpreted in a qualitative, binary fashion. Statistical evaluations included two-sided Fisher's exact tests, univariate log-rank tests of Kaplan-Meier curves as well as multivariate Cox regression analyses. RESULTS: WIF1 and DKK3 promoter methylation were detected in 63.3% (95/150) and 61.3% (92/150) of breast carcinoma samples, respectively. In normal breast tissues, WIF1 methylation was present in 0% (0/19) and DKK3 methylation in 5.3% (1/19) of samples. In breast carcinomas, WIF1 methylation was significantly associated with methylation of DKK3 (p = 0.009). Methylation of either gene was not associated with clinicopathological parameters, except for DKK3 methylation being associated with patient age (p = 0.007). In univariate analysis, WIF1 methylation was not associated with clinical patient outcome. In contrast, DKK3 methylation was a prognostic factor in patient overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS). Estimated OS rates after 10 years were 54% for patients with DKK3-methylated tumors, in contrast to patients without DKK3 methylation in the tumor, who had a favorable 97% OS after 10 years (p < 0.001). Likewise, DFS at 10 years for patients harboring DKK3 methylation in the tumor was 58%, compared with 78% for patients with unmethylated DKK3 (p = 0.037). Multivariate analyses revealed that DKK3 methylation was an independent prognostic factor predicting poor OS (hazard ratio (HR): 14.4; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.9-111.6; p = 0.011), and short DFS (HR: 2.5; 95% CI: 1.0-6.0; p = 0.047) in breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Although the Wnt antagonist genes WIF1 and DKK3 show a very similar frequency of promoter methylation in human breast cancer, only DKK3 methylation proves as a novel prognostic marker potentially useful in the clinical management of this disease.

Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase H1/Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Non receptor Type 3 (PTPH1/PTPN3) is upregulated and/or mutated in glioma, ovarian, gastric, and colorectal cancers. Previous studies have documented that PTPH1-associated breast cancers exhibit enhanced sensitivity to tamoxifen and tyrosine kinase inhibitors through dephosphorylation of ER and epidermal growth factor receptor, respectively. Owing to the key role that PTPH1 plays as a biomarker in predicting the response of chemotherapeutic drugs and lack of studies on Indian breast cancer patients, the present study investigated PTPH1 protein expression and its relationship to clinical features, ER/PR/HER2/neu statuses, and methylation of promoter in breast cancer tissues (n = 67) among Indian population by immunohistochemistry and methylation specific polymerase chain reaction. PTPH1 expression was upregulated in 58.21% (39/67) and downregulated in the rest of tumor specimens, and it correlated with ER, PR, and HER2/neu statuses with p values of <0.0001, 0.0113, and 0.0448, respectively. Additionally, we found that the 2 kb region upstream of PTPH1 gene harbored CpG sites within, and was ubiquitously methylated in breast cancer (n = 13), colon cancer tissue (n = 1), uterine cancer tissue (n = 1), normal breast tissue (n = 1) in addition to Hela and MCF7 cell lines. In conclusion, our data showed a strong correlation of the PTPH1 status with the ER and ubiquitous nature of PTPH1 promoter methylation at specific CpG sites irrespective of cancer types and protein expression. Our findings underscore the clinical relevance of PTPH1 expression in Indian patients and warrant additional studies to explore the importance of ubiquitously methylated promoter at specific CpG sites in upstream of the PTPH1 gene.. Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase H1/Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase Non receptor Type 3 (PTPH1/PTPN3) is upregulated and/or mutated in glioma, ovarian, gastric, and colorectal cancers. Previous studies have documented that PTPH1-associated breast cancers exhibit enhanced sensitivity to tamoxifen and tyrosine kinase inhibitors through dephosphorylation of ER and epidermal growth factor receptor, respectively. Owing to the key role that PTPH1 plays as a biomarker in predicting the response of chemotherapeutic drugs and lack of studies on Indian breast cancer patients, the present study investigated PTPH1 protein expression and its relationship to clinical features, ER/PR/HER2/neu statuses, and methylation of promoter in breast cancer tissues (n = 67) among Indian population by immunohistochemistry and methylation specific polymerase chain reaction. PTPH1 expression was upregulated in 58.21% (39/67) and downregulated in the rest of tumor specimens, and it correlated with ER, PR, and HER2/neu statuses with p values of <0.0001, 0.0113, and 0.0448, respectively. Additionally, we found that the 2 kb region upstream of PTPH1 gene harbored CpG sites within, and was ubiquitously methylated in breast cancer (n = 13), colon cancer tissue (n = 1), uterine cancer tissue (n = 1), normal breast tissue (n = 1) in addition to Hela and MCF7 cell lines. In conclusion, our data showed a strong correlation of the PTPH1 status with the ER and ubiquitous nature of PTPH1 promoter methylation at specific CpG sites irrespective of cancer types and protein expression. Our findings underscore the clinical relevance of PTPH1 expression in Indian patients and warrant additional studies to explore the importance of ubiquitously methylated promoter at specific CpG sites in upstream of the PTPH1 gene.

Breast cancer prognosis and response to endocrine therapy strongly depends on the expression of the estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR, respectively). Although much is known about ERalpha gene (ESR1) regulation after hormonal stimulation, how it is regulated in hormone-free condition is not fully understood. We used ER-/PR-positive breast cancer cells to investigate the role of PR in ESR1 regulation in the absence of hormones. We show that PR binds to the low-methylated ESR1 promoter and maintains both gene expression and DNA methylation of the ESR1 locus in hormone-deprived breast cancer cells. Depletion of PR reduces ESR1 expression, with a concomitant increase in gene promoter methylation. The high amount of methylation in the ESR1 promoter of PR-depleted cells persists after the stable re-expression of PR and inhibits PR binding to this genomic region. As a consequence, the rescue of PR expression in PR-depleted cells is insufficient to restore ESR1 expression. Consistently, DNA methylation impedes PR binding to consensus progesterone responsive elements. These findings contribute to understanding the complex crosstalk between PR and ER and suggest that the analysis of ESR1 promoter methylation in breast cancer cells can help to design more appropriate targeted therapies for breast cancer patients.. Breast cancer prognosis and response to endocrine therapy strongly depends on the expression of the estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR, respectively). Although much is known about ERalpha gene (ESR1) regulation after hormonal stimulation, how it is regulated in hormone-free condition is not fully understood. We used ER-/PR-positive breast cancer cells to investigate the role of PR in ESR1 regulation in the absence of hormones. We show that PR binds to the low-methylated ESR1 promoter and maintains both gene expression and DNA methylation of the ESR1 locus in hormone-deprived breast cancer cells. Depletion of PR reduces ESR1 expression, with a concomitant increase in gene promoter methylation. The high amount of methylation in the ESR1 promoter of PR-depleted cells persists after the stable re-expression of PR and inhibits PR binding to this genomic region. As a consequence, the rescue of PR expression in PR-depleted cells is insufficient to restore ESR1 expression. Consistently, DNA methylation impedes PR binding to consensus progesterone responsive elements. These findings contribute to understanding the complex crosstalk between PR and ER and suggest that the analysis of ESR1 promoter methylation in breast cancer cells can help to design more appropriate targeted therapies for breast cancer patients.

We show that in a series of eight breast cancer cell lines, a direct relationship exists between the overall DNA demethylation and the percentage of rearranged chromosomes, except for cell lines with a highly rearranged genome which can be weakly demethylated. A real time fluorescent detection method was used to quantify by reverse transcription-PCR the expression of the DNA methyltransferase 1 and of the newly discovered DNA demethylase. The overall DNA methylation status seems to result from a complex interplay between the expression of these two genes. Our results suggest that in these tumor cells, the overall DNA demethylation is implicated in one of the mechanisms at the origin of the genome instability and that besides the role of the DNA methyltransferase 1, that of the DNA demethylase may be essential in the control of DNA methylation.. We show that in a series of eight breast cancer cell lines, a direct relationship exists between the overall DNA demethylation and the percentage of rearranged chromosomes, except for cell lines with a highly rearranged genome which can be weakly demethylated. A real time fluorescent detection method was used to quantify by reverse transcription-PCR the expression of the DNA methyltransferase 1 and of the newly discovered DNA demethylase. The overall DNA methylation status seems to result from a complex interplay between the expression of these two genes. Our results suggest that in these tumor cells, the overall DNA demethylation is implicated in one of the mechanisms at the origin of the genome instability and that besides the role of the DNA methyltransferase 1, that of the DNA demethylase may be essential in the control of DNA methylation.

DNA methylation alteration of several genes contributes to human tumorigenesis. Cyclin D2, a member of the D-type cyclins, is implicated in cell cycle regulation and malignant transformation. In our study, we examined the methylation status of the cyclin D2 promoter in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), breast tumors and tumor cell lines. We observed that aberrant methylation of cyclin D2 was present in 32 of 56 (57%) SCLC cell lines, 7 of 32 (22%) SCLC tumor tissues; 25 of 61 (47%) NSCLC cell lines, 19 of 48 (40%) NSCLC tumor tissues; 18 of 30 (60%) breast tumor cell lines and 19 of 63 (30%) breast tumor tissues. Methylation was more frequent in the tumor cell lines compared to the primary breast and SCLC tumors (p = 0.007 and p = 0.001, respectively). Methylation was rare in the control tissue samples; 0 of 12 peripheral blood lymphocytes; 0 of 12 buccal epithelial cells; 0 of 18 nonmalignant lung tissues and 3 of 28 (11%) nonmalignant breast tissues. Promoter methylation correlated with loss of transcript by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in 9 of 11 (6 lung, 5 breast) tumor cell lines tested. Two cell lines that were not methylated also lacked expression, suggesting that other mechanisms of inactivation may be involved. Expression was restored by treatment with the demethylating agent, 5 aza 2' deoxycytidine, in all 9 methylated cell lines. Our results confirm earlier reports in breast cancer and indicate that aberrant methylation of cyclin D2 may contribute to the pathogenesis of the 2 major types of lung cancers.. DNA methylation alteration of several genes contributes to human tumorigenesis. Cyclin D2, a member of the D-type cyclins, is implicated in cell cycle regulation and malignant transformation. In our study, we examined the methylation status of the cyclin D2 promoter in small cell lung cancer (SCLC), nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), breast tumors and tumor cell lines. We observed that aberrant methylation of cyclin D2 was present in 32 of 56 (57%) SCLC cell lines, 7 of 32 (22%) SCLC tumor tissues; 25 of 61 (47%) NSCLC cell lines, 19 of 48 (40%) NSCLC tumor tissues; 18 of 30 (60%) breast tumor cell lines and 19 of 63 (30%) breast tumor tissues. Methylation was more frequent in the tumor cell lines compared to the primary breast and SCLC tumors (p = 0.007 and p = 0.001, respectively). Methylation was rare in the control tissue samples; 0 of 12 peripheral blood lymphocytes; 0 of 12 buccal epithelial cells; 0 of 18 nonmalignant lung tissues and 3 of 28 (11%) nonmalignant breast tissues. Promoter methylation correlated with loss of transcript by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in 9 of 11 (6 lung, 5 breast) tumor cell lines tested. Two cell lines that were not methylated also lacked expression, suggesting that other mechanisms of inactivation may be involved. Expression was restored by treatment with the demethylating agent, 5 aza 2' deoxycytidine, in all 9 methylated cell lines. Our results confirm earlier reports in breast cancer and indicate that aberrant methylation of cyclin D2 may contribute to the pathogenesis of the 2 major types of lung cancers.

TMS1 (target of methylation-induced silencing) is a CpG island-associated gene that functions in the regulation of apoptosis and encodes a caspase recruitment domain, a recently described motif found in apoptotic signaling molecules. Recent evidence suggests that silencing of genes in the apoptotic pathway contribute to human carcinogenesis. We examined the DNA methylation status of the TMS1 promoter in lung and breast tumor tissues, tumor cell lines and nonmalignant tissues by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) and its mRNA expression by reverse transcription PCR. Aberrant methylation of TMS1 was present in 70% (40 of 57) of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines and 41% (13 of 32) of SCLC tumor tissues, 48% (29 of 61) of non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and 40% (28 of 70) of NSCLC tumor tissues and 46% (12 of 26) of breast cancer cell lines and 32% (20 of 63) of breast tumor tissues. Methylation was absent in the peripheral blood lymphocytes and buccal epithelium from healthy volunteers, as well as in nonmalignant lung tissues and was rare in nonmalignant breast tissues 7% (2 of 30). DNA methylation was confirmed by sequence analysis and the methylation status correlated inversely with TMS1 RNA expression in 18 cell lines tested. RNA expression was restored by treatment with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, in 4 of 4 methylated cell lines that lacked the TMS1 transcript. Our results suggest that methylation of TMS1 may play a role in the pathogenesis of small cell and non small lung and breast cancers.. TMS1 (target of methylation-induced silencing) is a CpG island-associated gene that functions in the regulation of apoptosis and encodes a caspase recruitment domain, a recently described motif found in apoptotic signaling molecules. Recent evidence suggests that silencing of genes in the apoptotic pathway contribute to human carcinogenesis. We examined the DNA methylation status of the TMS1 promoter in lung and breast tumor tissues, tumor cell lines and nonmalignant tissues by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) and its mRNA expression by reverse transcription PCR. Aberrant methylation of TMS1 was present in 70% (40 of 57) of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines and 41% (13 of 32) of SCLC tumor tissues, 48% (29 of 61) of non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines and 40% (28 of 70) of NSCLC tumor tissues and 46% (12 of 26) of breast cancer cell lines and 32% (20 of 63) of breast tumor tissues. Methylation was absent in the peripheral blood lymphocytes and buccal epithelium from healthy volunteers, as well as in nonmalignant lung tissues and was rare in nonmalignant breast tissues 7% (2 of 30). DNA methylation was confirmed by sequence analysis and the methylation status correlated inversely with TMS1 RNA expression in 18 cell lines tested. RNA expression was restored by treatment with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, in 4 of 4 methylated cell lines that lacked the TMS1 transcript. Our results suggest that methylation of TMS1 may play a role in the pathogenesis of small cell and non small lung and breast cancers.

The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is a tumor suppressor gene associated with both familial and sporadic cancer. Despite high rates of allelic loss in lung and breast cancers, point mutations of the APC gene are infrequent in these cancer types. Aberrant methylation of the APC promoter 1A occurs in some colorectal and gastric malignancies, and we investigated whether the same mechanism occurs in lung and breast cancers. The methylation status of the APC gene promoter 1A was analyzed in 77 breast, 50 small cell (SCLC), and 106 non-small cell (NSCLC) lung cancer tumors and cell lines and in 68 nonmalignant tissues by methylation-specific PCR. Expression of the APC promoter 1A transcript was examined in a subset of cell lines by reverse transcription-PCR, and loss of heterozygosity at the gene locus was analyzed by the use of 12 microsatellite and polymorphic markers. Statistical tests were two-sided. Promoter 1A was methylated in 34 of 77 breast cancer tumors and cell lines (44%), in 56 of 106 NSCLC tumors and cell lines (53%), in 13 of 50 SCLC cell lines (26%), and in 3 of 68 nonmalignant samples (4%). Most cell lines tested contained the unmethylated or methylated form exclusively. In 27 cell lines tested, there was complete concordance between promoter methylation and silencing of its transcript. Demethylation with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment restored transcript 1A expression in all eight methylated cell lines tested. Loss of heterozygosity at the APC locus was observed in 85% of SCLCs, 83% of NSCLCs, and 63% of breast cancer cell lines. The frequency of methylation in breast cancers increased with tumor stage and size. In summary, aberrant methylation of the 1A promoter of the APC gene and loss of its specific transcript is frequently present in breast and NSCLC cancers and cell lines and, to a lesser extent, in SCLC cell lines. Our findings may be of biological and clinical importance.. The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is a tumor suppressor gene associated with both familial and sporadic cancer. Despite high rates of allelic loss in lung and breast cancers, point mutations of the APC gene are infrequent in these cancer types. Aberrant methylation of the APC promoter 1A occurs in some colorectal and gastric malignancies, and we investigated whether the same mechanism occurs in lung and breast cancers. The methylation status of the APC gene promoter 1A was analyzed in 77 breast, 50 small cell (SCLC), and 106 non-small cell (NSCLC) lung cancer tumors and cell lines and in 68 nonmalignant tissues by methylation-specific PCR. Expression of the APC promoter 1A transcript was examined in a subset of cell lines by reverse transcription-PCR, and loss of heterozygosity at the gene locus was analyzed by the use of 12 microsatellite and polymorphic markers. Statistical tests were two-sided. Promoter 1A was methylated in 34 of 77 breast cancer tumors and cell lines (44%), in 56 of 106 NSCLC tumors and cell lines (53%), in 13 of 50 SCLC cell lines (26%), and in 3 of 68 nonmalignant samples (4%). Most cell lines tested contained the unmethylated or methylated form exclusively. In 27 cell lines tested, there was complete concordance between promoter methylation and silencing of its transcript. Demethylation with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment restored transcript 1A expression in all eight methylated cell lines tested. Loss of heterozygosity at the APC locus was observed in 85% of SCLCs, 83% of NSCLCs, and 63% of breast cancer cell lines. The frequency of methylation in breast cancers increased with tumor stage and size. In summary, aberrant methylation of the 1A promoter of the APC gene and loss of its specific transcript is frequently present in breast and NSCLC cancers and cell lines and, to a lesser extent, in SCLC cell lines. Our findings may be of biological and clinical importance.

Purpose Epigenetic alterations measured in blood may help guide breast cancer treatment. The multisite prospective study TBCRC 005 was conducted to examine the ability of a novel panel of cell-free DNA methylation markers to predict survival outcomes in metastatic breast cancer (MBC) using a new quantitative multiplex assay (cMethDNA). Patients and Methods Ten genes were tested in duplicate serum samples from 141 women at baseline, at week 4, and at first restaging. A cumulative methylation index (CMI) was generated on the basis of six of the 10 genes tested. Methylation cut points were selected to maximize the log-rank statistic, and cross-validation was used to obtain unbiased point estimates. Logistic regression or Cox proportional hazard models were used to test associations between the CMI and progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and disease status at first restaging. The added value of the CMI in predicting survival outcomes was evaluated and compared with circulating tumor cells (CellSearch). Results Median PFS and OS were significantly shorter in women with a high CMI (PFS, 2.1 months; OS, 12.3 months) versus a low CMI (PFS, 5.8 months; OS, 21.7 months). In multivariable models, among women with MBC, a high versus low CMI at week 4 was independently associated with worse PFS (hazard ratio, 1.79; 95% CI, 1.23 to 2.60; P = .002) and OS (hazard ratio, 1.75; 95% CI, 1.21 to 2.54; P = .003). An increase in the CMI from baseline to week 4 was associated with worse PFS ( P < .001) and progressive disease at first restaging ( P < .001). Week 4 CMI was a strong predictor of PFS, even in the presence of circulating tumor cells ( P = .004). Conclusion Methylation of this gene panel is a strong predictor of survival outcomes in MBC and may have clinical usefulness in risk stratification and disease monitoring.. Purpose Epigenetic alterations measured in blood may help guide breast cancer treatment. The multisite prospective study TBCRC 005 was conducted to examine the ability of a novel panel of cell-free DNA methylation markers to predict survival outcomes in metastatic breast cancer (MBC) using a new quantitative multiplex assay (cMethDNA). Patients and Methods Ten genes were tested in duplicate serum samples from 141 women at baseline, at week 4, and at first restaging. A cumulative methylation index (CMI) was generated on the basis of six of the 10 genes tested. Methylation cut points were selected to maximize the log-rank statistic, and cross-validation was used to obtain unbiased point estimates. Logistic regression or Cox proportional hazard models were used to test associations between the CMI and progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS), and disease status at first restaging. The added value of the CMI in predicting survival outcomes was evaluated and compared with circulating tumor cells (CellSearch). Results Median PFS and OS were significantly shorter in women with a high CMI (PFS, 2.1 months; OS, 12.3 months) versus a low CMI (PFS, 5.8 months; OS, 21.7 months). In multivariable models, among women with MBC, a high versus low CMI at week 4 was independently associated with worse PFS (hazard ratio, 1.79; 95% CI, 1.23 to 2.60; P = .002) and OS (hazard ratio, 1.75; 95% CI, 1.21 to 2.54; P = .003). An increase in the CMI from baseline to week 4 was associated with worse PFS ( P < .001) and progressive disease at first restaging ( P < .001). Week 4 CMI was a strong predictor of PFS, even in the presence of circulating tumor cells ( P = .004). Conclusion Methylation of this gene panel is a strong predictor of survival outcomes in MBC and may have clinical usefulness in risk stratification and disease monitoring.

Hypermethylation of promoter regions leading to inactivation of tumor suppressor genes is a common event in the progression of several tumor types. We have employed a novel restriction digestion based multiplex PCR assay to analyse the methylation status of promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes (p16, hMLH1, MGMT and E-cadherin) in sporadic breast carcinomas of Indian women. The present results indicated the absence of hypermethylation in promoter region of p16 and MGMT genes. However, 6 of the 19 (31.6%) sporadic breast carcinomas showed hypermethylation in the promoters of two of the genes analysed; three in hMLH1 and another three in E-cad. Since our earlier studies have shown lack of genetic alterations such as missense mutations and deletions in the tumor associated genes-p16, ras and p14ARF in sporadic breast tumors, the epigenetic alterations of the two genes reported in the present study could be of interest and might be among the events in the genesis/progression of sporadic breast carcinomas.. Hypermethylation of promoter regions leading to inactivation of tumor suppressor genes is a common event in the progression of several tumor types. We have employed a novel restriction digestion based multiplex PCR assay to analyse the methylation status of promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes (p16, hMLH1, MGMT and E-cadherin) in sporadic breast carcinomas of Indian women. The present results indicated the absence of hypermethylation in promoter region of p16 and MGMT genes. However, 6 of the 19 (31.6%) sporadic breast carcinomas showed hypermethylation in the promoters of two of the genes analysed; three in hMLH1 and another three in E-cad. Since our earlier studies have shown lack of genetic alterations such as missense mutations and deletions in the tumor associated genes-p16, ras and p14ARF in sporadic breast tumors, the epigenetic alterations of the two genes reported in the present study could be of interest and might be among the events in the genesis/progression of sporadic breast carcinomas.

BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, BRCA promoter hypermethylation and BRCA germline mutations are said to occur together rarely, but this property has not yet been translated into a clinical test. Our aim in this study was to investigate the diagnostic value of BRCA1/2 methylation in distinguishing breast carcinomas of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutation carriers from sporadic breast carcinomas using a recently developed BRCA methylation assay based on methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA). METHODS: MS-MLPAs were performed to assess BRCA1 and BRCA2 methylation in breast carcinoma tissues from 39 BRCA1 and 33 BRCA2 germline mutation carriers, 80 patients with sporadic breast cancer, and normal breast tissues from 5 BRCA1 and 4 BRCA2 mutation carriers and 5 nonmutation carriers. RESULTS: Methylation frequencies varied considerably between CpG sites across the BRCA1 and BRCA2 promoters. Some CpG sites were methylated more frequently in BRCA1/2-related than in sporadic carcinomas, whereas other CpG sites were methylated more frequently in sporadic carcinomas, with large variances in sensitivity and specificity as a consequence. CONCLUSIONS: The diagnostic value of BRCA promoter methylation analysis in distinguishing BRCA1/2-related from sporadic breast carcinomas seems to be considerably dependent on the targeted CpG sites. These findings are important for adequate use of BRCA methylation analysis as a prescreening tool for BRCA germline genetic testing or to identify BRCAness patients who may benefit from targeted therapies such as poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase inhibitors.. BACKGROUND: In breast cancer, BRCA promoter hypermethylation and BRCA germline mutations are said to occur together rarely, but this property has not yet been translated into a clinical test. Our aim in this study was to investigate the diagnostic value of BRCA1/2 methylation in distinguishing breast carcinomas of BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutation carriers from sporadic breast carcinomas using a recently developed BRCA methylation assay based on methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA). METHODS: MS-MLPAs were performed to assess BRCA1 and BRCA2 methylation in breast carcinoma tissues from 39 BRCA1 and 33 BRCA2 germline mutation carriers, 80 patients with sporadic breast cancer, and normal breast tissues from 5 BRCA1 and 4 BRCA2 mutation carriers and 5 nonmutation carriers. RESULTS: Methylation frequencies varied considerably between CpG sites across the BRCA1 and BRCA2 promoters. Some CpG sites were methylated more frequently in BRCA1/2-related than in sporadic carcinomas, whereas other CpG sites were methylated more frequently in sporadic carcinomas, with large variances in sensitivity and specificity as a consequence. CONCLUSIONS: The diagnostic value of BRCA promoter methylation analysis in distinguishing BRCA1/2-related from sporadic breast carcinomas seems to be considerably dependent on the targeted CpG sites. These findings are important for adequate use of BRCA methylation analysis as a prescreening tool for BRCA germline genetic testing or to identify BRCAness patients who may benefit from targeted therapies such as poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase inhibitors.

BACKGROUND: A considerable number of breast and ovarian carcinomas are due to underlying BRCA gene aberrations. Of these, BRCA germline mutations and BRCA promoter methylation are thought to be mutually exclusive, which could be exploited in clinical practice. However, this paradigm has not been studied extensively and systematically. OBJECTIVE: To systematically investigate to what extent BRCA promoter methylation has been reported in breast and ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers. METHODS: A comprehensive search on BRCA promoter methylation was performed in PubMed and Embase databases. Two authors independently selected studies, assessed study quality and extracted data according to PRISMA and QUADAS-2 guidelines. RESULTS: 21 articles met the inclusion criteria. BRCA1 methylation was found in at least 10/276 (3,6%) breast and 2/174 (1,1%) ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers, and BRCA2 methylation was found in at least 7/131 (5.3%) breast and 0/51 (0.0%) ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers. Methylation frequencies varied between individual CpG sites. The selected studies showed important differences in methodology and performed in general a limited methylation and incomplete mutation analysis. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA methylation is rare in breast and ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers, although the frequency of BRCA promoter methylation may be underestimated. This could have major implications for clinical practice, including referral for genetic testing and BRCAness analysis for treatment decision-making.. BACKGROUND: A considerable number of breast and ovarian carcinomas are due to underlying BRCA gene aberrations. Of these, BRCA germline mutations and BRCA promoter methylation are thought to be mutually exclusive, which could be exploited in clinical practice. However, this paradigm has not been studied extensively and systematically. OBJECTIVE: To systematically investigate to what extent BRCA promoter methylation has been reported in breast and ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers. METHODS: A comprehensive search on BRCA promoter methylation was performed in PubMed and Embase databases. Two authors independently selected studies, assessed study quality and extracted data according to PRISMA and QUADAS-2 guidelines. RESULTS: 21 articles met the inclusion criteria. BRCA1 methylation was found in at least 10/276 (3,6%) breast and 2/174 (1,1%) ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers, and BRCA2 methylation was found in at least 7/131 (5.3%) breast and 0/51 (0.0%) ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers. Methylation frequencies varied between individual CpG sites. The selected studies showed important differences in methodology and performed in general a limited methylation and incomplete mutation analysis. CONCLUSIONS: BRCA methylation is rare in breast and ovarian carcinomas of BRCA germline mutation carriers, although the frequency of BRCA promoter methylation may be underestimated. This could have major implications for clinical practice, including referral for genetic testing and BRCAness analysis for treatment decision-making.

miRNAs are important regulators of gene expression that are frequently deregulated in cancer, with aberrant DNA methylation being an epigenetic mechanism involved in this process. We previously identified miRNA promoter regions active in normal mammary cell types and here we analyzed which of these promoters are targets of aberrant DNA methylation in human breast cancer cell lines and breast tumor specimens. Using 5-methylcytosine immunoprecipitation coupled to miRNA tiling microarray hybridization, we performed comprehensive evaluation of DNA methylation of miRNA gene promoters in breast cancer. We found almost one third (55/167) of miRNA promoters were targets for aberrant methylation in breast cancer cell lines. Breast tumor specimens displayed DNA methylation of majority of these miRNA promoters, indicating that these changes in DNA methylation might be clinically relevant. Aberrantly methylated miRNA promoters were, similar to protein coding genes, enriched for promoters targeted by polycomb in normal cells. Detailed analysis of selected miRNA promoters revealed decreased expression of miRNA linked to increased promoter methylation for mir-31, mir-130a, let-7a-3/let-7b, mir-155, mir-137 and mir-34b/mir-34c genes. The proportion of miRNA promoters we found aberrantly methylated in breast cancer is several fold larger than that observed for protein coding genes, indicating an important role of DNA methylation in miRNA deregulation in cancer.. miRNAs are important regulators of gene expression that are frequently deregulated in cancer, with aberrant DNA methylation being an epigenetic mechanism involved in this process. We previously identified miRNA promoter regions active in normal mammary cell types and here we analyzed which of these promoters are targets of aberrant DNA methylation in human breast cancer cell lines and breast tumor specimens. Using 5-methylcytosine immunoprecipitation coupled to miRNA tiling microarray hybridization, we performed comprehensive evaluation of DNA methylation of miRNA gene promoters in breast cancer. We found almost one third (55/167) of miRNA promoters were targets for aberrant methylation in breast cancer cell lines. Breast tumor specimens displayed DNA methylation of majority of these miRNA promoters, indicating that these changes in DNA methylation might be clinically relevant. Aberrantly methylated miRNA promoters were, similar to protein coding genes, enriched for promoters targeted by polycomb in normal cells. Detailed analysis of selected miRNA promoters revealed decreased expression of miRNA linked to increased promoter methylation for mir-31, mir-130a, let-7a-3/let-7b, mir-155, mir-137 and mir-34b/mir-34c genes. The proportion of miRNA promoters we found aberrantly methylated in breast cancer is several fold larger than that observed for protein coding genes, indicating an important role of DNA methylation in miRNA deregulation in cancer.

Objective: This study investigated the DNA promoter methylation profiles of BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 genes, both individually and in an integrative manner in order to clarify their correlation with clinicopathological parameters of breast cancer from Vietnamese patients, and establish new potential integrative methylation biomarkers for breast cancer detection. Material and methods: The methylation frequencies of BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 were analyzed by methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in 70 specimens of breast carcinomas and 79 pairs of tumor and matched adjacent normal tissues from breast cancer patients. Results: All the three analyzed genes showed a concordance concerning their promoter methylation in tumor and adjacent normal tissue. The methylation of BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 was found in 58.23 %, 74.68 % and 59.49 % of tumor tissues and 51.90 %, 63.29 % and 35.44 % of corresponding adjacent tissues, respectively. When each gene was assessed individually, only the methylation of GSTP1 was significantly associated with tumor tissues (p=0.003). However, the methylation frequency of at least one of the three genes and the methylation frequency of all the three genes both showed significant association with tumor (p=0.008 and p=0.04, respectively). The methylation of BRCA1 was found to be significantly associated with tumor grade (p=0.01). Conclusion: This study emphasized that the panel of the three genes BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 can be further developed as potential biomarkers in diagnosis and classification of breast cancer in Vietnamese women.. Objective: This study investigated the DNA promoter methylation profiles of BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 genes, both individually and in an integrative manner in order to clarify their correlation with clinicopathological parameters of breast cancer from Vietnamese patients, and establish new potential integrative methylation biomarkers for breast cancer detection. Material and methods: The methylation frequencies of BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 were analyzed by methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in 70 specimens of breast carcinomas and 79 pairs of tumor and matched adjacent normal tissues from breast cancer patients. Results: All the three analyzed genes showed a concordance concerning their promoter methylation in tumor and adjacent normal tissue. The methylation of BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 was found in 58.23 %, 74.68 % and 59.49 % of tumor tissues and 51.90 %, 63.29 % and 35.44 % of corresponding adjacent tissues, respectively. When each gene was assessed individually, only the methylation of GSTP1 was significantly associated with tumor tissues (p=0.003). However, the methylation frequency of at least one of the three genes and the methylation frequency of all the three genes both showed significant association with tumor (p=0.008 and p=0.04, respectively). The methylation of BRCA1 was found to be significantly associated with tumor grade (p=0.01). Conclusion: This study emphasized that the panel of the three genes BRCA1, RASSF1A and GSTP1 can be further developed as potential biomarkers in diagnosis and classification of breast cancer in Vietnamese women.

BACKGROUND: Paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) is another new marker in breast carcinoma since hypermethylation at P2 promoter of this gene was noted to be associated with poor prognosis. We investigated the expression of PITX2 protein using immunohistochemistry in invasive ductal carcinoma and its association with the established growth receptors such as estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2). METHODS: We conducted a cross sectional study using 100 samples of archived formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue blocks of invasive ductal carcinoma and stained them with immunohistochemistry for PITX2, ER, PR and HER2. All HER2 with scoring of 2+ were confirmed with chromogenic in-situ hybridization (CISH). RESULTS: PITX2 protein was expressed in 53% of invasive ductal carcinoma and lack of PITX2 expression in 47%. Univariate analysis revealed a significant association between PITX2 expression with PR (p=0.001), ER (p=0.006), gland formation (p=0.044) and marginal association with molecular subtypes of breast carcinoma (p=0.051). Combined ER and PR expression with PITX2 was also significantly associated (p=0.003) especially in double positive cases. Multivariate analysis showed the most significant association between PITX2 and PR (RR 4.105, 95% CI 1.765-9.547, p=0.001). CONCLUSION: PITX2 is another potential prognostic marker in breast carcinoma adding significant information to established prognostic factors of ER and PR. The expression of PITX2 together with PR may carry a very good prognosis.. BACKGROUND: Paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) is another new marker in breast carcinoma since hypermethylation at P2 promoter of this gene was noted to be associated with poor prognosis. We investigated the expression of PITX2 protein using immunohistochemistry in invasive ductal carcinoma and its association with the established growth receptors such as estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth receptor 2 (HER2). METHODS: We conducted a cross sectional study using 100 samples of archived formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue blocks of invasive ductal carcinoma and stained them with immunohistochemistry for PITX2, ER, PR and HER2. All HER2 with scoring of 2+ were confirmed with chromogenic in-situ hybridization (CISH). RESULTS: PITX2 protein was expressed in 53% of invasive ductal carcinoma and lack of PITX2 expression in 47%. Univariate analysis revealed a significant association between PITX2 expression with PR (p=0.001), ER (p=0.006), gland formation (p=0.044) and marginal association with molecular subtypes of breast carcinoma (p=0.051). Combined ER and PR expression with PITX2 was also significantly associated (p=0.003) especially in double positive cases. Multivariate analysis showed the most significant association between PITX2 and PR (RR 4.105, 95% CI 1.765-9.547, p=0.001). CONCLUSION: PITX2 is another potential prognostic marker in breast carcinoma adding significant information to established prognostic factors of ER and PR. The expression of PITX2 together with PR may carry a very good prognosis.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women worldwide. Although the endocrine therapy that targets estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) signaling has been well established as an effective adjuvant treatment for patients with ERalpha-positive breast cancers, long-term exposure may eventually lead to the development of acquired resistance to the anti-estrogen drugs, such as fulvestrant and tamoxifen. A better understanding of the mechanisms underlying antiestrogen resistance and identification of the key molecules involved may help in overcoming antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer. METHODS: The whole-genome gene expression and DNA methylation profilings were performed using fulvestrant-resistant cell line 182(R)-6 and tamoxifen-resistant cell line TAM(R)-1 as a model system. In addition, qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis were performed to determine the levels of mRNA and protein molecules. MTT, apoptosis and cell cycle analyses were performed to examine the effect of either guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta-4 (GNB4) overexpression or knockdown on cell proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. RESULTS: Among 9 candidate genes, GNB4 was identified and validated by qRT-PCR as a potential target silenced by DNA methylation via DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B). We generated stable 182(R)-6 and TAM(R)-1 cell lines that are constantly expressing GNB4 and determined the effect of the ectopic GNB4 on cell proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptosis of the antiestrogen-resistant cells in response to either fulvestrant or tamoxifen. Ectopic expression of GNB4 in two antiestrogen resistant cell lines significantly promoted cell growth and shortened cell cycle in the presence of either fulvestrant or tamoxifen. The ectopic GNB4 induced apoptosis in 182(R)-6 cells, whereas it inhibited apoptosis in TAM(R)-1 cells. Many regulators controlling cell cycle and apoptosis were aberrantly expressed in two resistant cell lines in response to the enforced GNB4 expression, which may contribute to GNB4-mediated biologic and/or pathologic processes. Furthermore, knockdown of GNB4 decreased growth of both antiestrogen resistant and sensitive breast cancer cells. CONCLUSION: GNB4 is important for growth of breast cancer cells and a potential target for treatment.. BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women worldwide. Although the endocrine therapy that targets estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) signaling has been well established as an effective adjuvant treatment for patients with ERalpha-positive breast cancers, long-term exposure may eventually lead to the development of acquired resistance to the anti-estrogen drugs, such as fulvestrant and tamoxifen. A better understanding of the mechanisms underlying antiestrogen resistance and identification of the key molecules involved may help in overcoming antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer. METHODS: The whole-genome gene expression and DNA methylation profilings were performed using fulvestrant-resistant cell line 182(R)-6 and tamoxifen-resistant cell line TAM(R)-1 as a model system. In addition, qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis were performed to determine the levels of mRNA and protein molecules. MTT, apoptosis and cell cycle analyses were performed to examine the effect of either guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta-4 (GNB4) overexpression or knockdown on cell proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. RESULTS: Among 9 candidate genes, GNB4 was identified and validated by qRT-PCR as a potential target silenced by DNA methylation via DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B). We generated stable 182(R)-6 and TAM(R)-1 cell lines that are constantly expressing GNB4 and determined the effect of the ectopic GNB4 on cell proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptosis of the antiestrogen-resistant cells in response to either fulvestrant or tamoxifen. Ectopic expression of GNB4 in two antiestrogen resistant cell lines significantly promoted cell growth and shortened cell cycle in the presence of either fulvestrant or tamoxifen. The ectopic GNB4 induced apoptosis in 182(R)-6 cells, whereas it inhibited apoptosis in TAM(R)-1 cells. Many regulators controlling cell cycle and apoptosis were aberrantly expressed in two resistant cell lines in response to the enforced GNB4 expression, which may contribute to GNB4-mediated biologic and/or pathologic processes. Furthermore, knockdown of GNB4 decreased growth of both antiestrogen resistant and sensitive breast cancer cells. CONCLUSION: GNB4 is important for growth of breast cancer cells and a potential target for treatment.

Promoter hypermethylation causes gene silencing and is thought to be an early event in carcinogenesis. This study was to detect promoter methylation status and mRNA expression levels of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and sirtuin 6 (SIRT6), and to explore the relationship between methylation and mRNA expression in breast cancer patient samples. Promoter methylation analysis and expression profile analysis of two genes were performed by methylation-specific PCR, bisulfite sequencing PCR, and quantitative real-time PCR in cancer lesions and matched normal tissues. The promoter region of CTCF has not been hypermethylated in all patient samples. In contrast, methylation of SIRT6 gene was present in invasive cancers (93.5%) and matched normal tissues (96.8%) from 62 patients. Promoter hypermethylation of SIRT6 was also observed in ductal carcinoma in situ (three of three) and matched normal tissues (two of three). mRNA expression of CTCF and SIRT6 in invasive tumors showed a lower level than that in paired normal tissues (p=0.008 and p=0.030, respectively). The fold change values of CTCF expression were significantly lower in invasive ductal cancer lesions with Ki-67-positive status (p=0.042). In conclusion, our data showed that the methylation status of CTCF and SIRT6 promoter regions was not statistically different in cancer lesions compared with matched normal tissues. No significant association between promoter methylation status and expression profiles of CTCF and SIRT6 was found in invasive breast cancers.. Promoter hypermethylation causes gene silencing and is thought to be an early event in carcinogenesis. This study was to detect promoter methylation status and mRNA expression levels of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) and sirtuin 6 (SIRT6), and to explore the relationship between methylation and mRNA expression in breast cancer patient samples. Promoter methylation analysis and expression profile analysis of two genes were performed by methylation-specific PCR, bisulfite sequencing PCR, and quantitative real-time PCR in cancer lesions and matched normal tissues. The promoter region of CTCF has not been hypermethylated in all patient samples. In contrast, methylation of SIRT6 gene was present in invasive cancers (93.5%) and matched normal tissues (96.8%) from 62 patients. Promoter hypermethylation of SIRT6 was also observed in ductal carcinoma in situ (three of three) and matched normal tissues (two of three). mRNA expression of CTCF and SIRT6 in invasive tumors showed a lower level than that in paired normal tissues (p=0.008 and p=0.030, respectively). The fold change values of CTCF expression were significantly lower in invasive ductal cancer lesions with Ki-67-positive status (p=0.042). In conclusion, our data showed that the methylation status of CTCF and SIRT6 promoter regions was not statistically different in cancer lesions compared with matched normal tissues. No significant association between promoter methylation status and expression profiles of CTCF and SIRT6 was found in invasive breast cancers.

Breast cancer has been considered to be a multifactorial disease with a wide array of well-characterized gene mutations and chromosomal abnormalities. However, it is becoming evident that the onset or development of breast cancer also depends on epigenetic factors, although the mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. We performed a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation of breast carcinomatous tissues and paired normal tissues to examine the differences in methylation between them. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) was used to validate the hypermethylated genes screened out by DNA methylation microarray. We found that hypomethylation and hypermethylation occurred in 2753 and 1795 genes, respectively, in breast carcinomatous tissues. Meanwhile, gene ontology analysis and ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the function and pathway of several genes whose methylation status was altered in breast carcinomatous tissues. In addition, we investigated the promoter methylation status of four genes in breast carcinomatous tissue and paired normal tissues (n=30) by MSP. Promoter hypermethylation of CRABP1, HOXB13, IFNGR2, and PIK3C3 was found in 37% (11/30), 23% (7/30), 17% (5/30), and 2% (2/30) of the carcinomas, respectively. Mutation of these four important genes was critical to many types of cancer. Our results suggest that DNA methylation mechanisms may be involved in regulating the occurrence and development of breast cancer.. Breast cancer has been considered to be a multifactorial disease with a wide array of well-characterized gene mutations and chromosomal abnormalities. However, it is becoming evident that the onset or development of breast cancer also depends on epigenetic factors, although the mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. We performed a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation of breast carcinomatous tissues and paired normal tissues to examine the differences in methylation between them. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) was used to validate the hypermethylated genes screened out by DNA methylation microarray. We found that hypomethylation and hypermethylation occurred in 2753 and 1795 genes, respectively, in breast carcinomatous tissues. Meanwhile, gene ontology analysis and ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the function and pathway of several genes whose methylation status was altered in breast carcinomatous tissues. In addition, we investigated the promoter methylation status of four genes in breast carcinomatous tissue and paired normal tissues (n=30) by MSP. Promoter hypermethylation of CRABP1, HOXB13, IFNGR2, and PIK3C3 was found in 37% (11/30), 23% (7/30), 17% (5/30), and 2% (2/30) of the carcinomas, respectively. Mutation of these four important genes was critical to many types of cancer. Our results suggest that DNA methylation mechanisms may be involved in regulating the occurrence and development of breast cancer.

Breast cancer (BC)-related mortality is associated with the potential metastatic properties of the primary breast tumors. The following study was conducted with the main focus on the effect of LINC00518 on the growth and metastasis of BC epithelial cells via the Wnt signaling pathway through regulation of the methylation of CDX2 gene. Initially, differentially expressed long intergenic non-protein coding RNAs (lincRNAs) related to BC were screened out in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, after which we detected the LINC00518 expression and localization in BC tissues and cells. Then the CDX2 positive expression and methylation level were identified. The targeting relationship of LINC00518 and CDX2, and binding methyltransferase in the promoter region were examined. BC epithelial cell proliferation, colony formation ability, invasion, migration and apoptosis were further evaluated. The lincRNA expression data related to BC downloaded from the TCGA database revealed that there was a high expression of LINC00518 in BC, and a negative correlation between LINC00518 and CDX2. In addition, LINC00518 promotes CDX2 methylation by recruiting DNA methyltransferase through activating the Wnt signaling pathway. The down-regulation of LINC00518 inhibited proliferation, invasion, migration, and EMT of BC epithelial cells while enhancing apoptosis. The inhibitory effects of LINC00518 down-regulation was reversed by CDX2 down-regulation. In conclusion, our findings revealed that down-regulation of LINC00518 might have the ability to suppress BC progression by up-regulating CDX2 expression through the reduction of methylation and blockade of the Wnt signaling pathway, resulting in the inhibition of proliferation and promotion of apoptosis of BC epithelial cells.. Breast cancer (BC)-related mortality is associated with the potential metastatic properties of the primary breast tumors. The following study was conducted with the main focus on the effect of LINC00518 on the growth and metastasis of BC epithelial cells via the Wnt signaling pathway through regulation of the methylation of CDX2 gene. Initially, differentially expressed long intergenic non-protein coding RNAs (lincRNAs) related to BC were screened out in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, after which we detected the LINC00518 expression and localization in BC tissues and cells. Then the CDX2 positive expression and methylation level were identified. The targeting relationship of LINC00518 and CDX2, and binding methyltransferase in the promoter region were examined. BC epithelial cell proliferation, colony formation ability, invasion, migration and apoptosis were further evaluated. The lincRNA expression data related to BC downloaded from the TCGA database revealed that there was a high expression of LINC00518 in BC, and a negative correlation between LINC00518 and CDX2. In addition, LINC00518 promotes CDX2 methylation by recruiting DNA methyltransferase through activating the Wnt signaling pathway. The down-regulation of LINC00518 inhibited proliferation, invasion, migration, and EMT of BC epithelial cells while enhancing apoptosis. The inhibitory effects of LINC00518 down-regulation was reversed by CDX2 down-regulation. In conclusion, our findings revealed that down-regulation of LINC00518 might have the ability to suppress BC progression by up-regulating CDX2 expression through the reduction of methylation and blockade of the Wnt signaling pathway, resulting in the inhibition of proliferation and promotion of apoptosis of BC epithelial cells.

The RNA polymerase II mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) is frequently mutated in human cancers, and loss of MED12 has been shown to induce drug resistance through activation of transforming growth factor-beta receptor (TGF-betaR) signaling. We identified MED12 as a substrate for coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1). Not only are the expression levels of CARM1 and MED12 positively correlated, but their high expression also predicts better prognosis in human breast cancers after chemotherapy. MED12 was methylated at R1862 and R1912 by CARM1, and mutation of these sites in cell lines resulted in resistance to chemotherapy drugs. Furthermore, we showed that the methylation-dependent drug response mechanism is distinct from activation of TGF-betaR signaling, because methylated MED12 potently suppresses p21/WAF1 transcription. Cells defective in MED12 methylation have up-regulated p21 protein, which correlates with poor prognosis in breast cancer patients treated with chemotherapy. Collectively, this study identifies MED12 methylation as a sensor for predicting response to commonly used chemotherapy drugs in human cancers.. The RNA polymerase II mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) is frequently mutated in human cancers, and loss of MED12 has been shown to induce drug resistance through activation of transforming growth factor-beta receptor (TGF-betaR) signaling. We identified MED12 as a substrate for coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1). Not only are the expression levels of CARM1 and MED12 positively correlated, but their high expression also predicts better prognosis in human breast cancers after chemotherapy. MED12 was methylated at R1862 and R1912 by CARM1, and mutation of these sites in cell lines resulted in resistance to chemotherapy drugs. Furthermore, we showed that the methylation-dependent drug response mechanism is distinct from activation of TGF-betaR signaling, because methylated MED12 potently suppresses p21/WAF1 transcription. Cells defective in MED12 methylation have up-regulated p21 protein, which correlates with poor prognosis in breast cancer patients treated with chemotherapy. Collectively, this study identifies MED12 methylation as a sensor for predicting response to commonly used chemotherapy drugs in human cancers.

Aberrant DNA methylation is critical for development and progression of breast cancer. We investigated the association of CpG island methylation in candidate genes and clinicopathological features in 65 African-American (AA) and European-American (EA) breast cancer patients. Quantitative methylation analysis was carried out on bisulfite modified genomic DNA and sequencing (pyrosequencing) for promoter CpG islands of p16, ESR1, RASSF1A, RARbeta2, CDH13, HIN1, SFRP1 genes and the LINE1 repetitive element using matched paired non-cancerous and breast tumor specimen (32 AA and 33 EA women). Five of the genes, all known tumor suppressor genes (RASSF1A, RARbeta2, CDH13, HIN1 and SFRP1), were found to be frequently hypermethylated in breast tumor tissues but not in the adjacent non-cancerous tissues. Significant differences in the CDH13 methylation status were observed by comparing DNA methylation between AA and EA patients, with more obvious CDH13 methylation differences between the two patient groups in the ER- disease and among young patients (age<50). In addition, we observed associations between CDH13, SFRP1, and RASSF1A methylation and breast cancer subtypes and between SFRP1 methylation and patient's age. Furthermore, tumors that received neoadjuvant therapy tended to have reduced RASSF1A methylation when compared with chemotherapy naive tumors. Finally, Kaplan Meier survival analysis showed a significant association between methylation at 3 loci (RASSF1A, RARbeta2 and CDH13) and reduced overall disease survival. In conclusion, the DNA methylation status of breast tumors was found to be significantly associated with clinicopathological features and race/ethnicity of the patients.. Aberrant DNA methylation is critical for development and progression of breast cancer. We investigated the association of CpG island methylation in candidate genes and clinicopathological features in 65 African-American (AA) and European-American (EA) breast cancer patients. Quantitative methylation analysis was carried out on bisulfite modified genomic DNA and sequencing (pyrosequencing) for promoter CpG islands of p16, ESR1, RASSF1A, RARbeta2, CDH13, HIN1, SFRP1 genes and the LINE1 repetitive element using matched paired non-cancerous and breast tumor specimen (32 AA and 33 EA women). Five of the genes, all known tumor suppressor genes (RASSF1A, RARbeta2, CDH13, HIN1 and SFRP1), were found to be frequently hypermethylated in breast tumor tissues but not in the adjacent non-cancerous tissues. Significant differences in the CDH13 methylation status were observed by comparing DNA methylation between AA and EA patients, with more obvious CDH13 methylation differences between the two patient groups in the ER- disease and among young patients (age<50). In addition, we observed associations between CDH13, SFRP1, and RASSF1A methylation and breast cancer subtypes and between SFRP1 methylation and patient's age. Furthermore, tumors that received neoadjuvant therapy tended to have reduced RASSF1A methylation when compared with chemotherapy naive tumors. Finally, Kaplan Meier survival analysis showed a significant association between methylation at 3 loci (RASSF1A, RARbeta2 and CDH13) and reduced overall disease survival. In conclusion, the DNA methylation status of breast tumors was found to be significantly associated with clinicopathological features and race/ethnicity of the patients.

The present study aimed to explore the relationship between DNA methylation and breast cancer under different cell culture conditions. MCF7 breast cancer cells were cultured in twodimensional (2D), threedimensional (3D) and orthotopic transplantation (Ti) adhesion substrates. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used for global visualization of these three samples. The methylation status of CpG sites was examined by unsupervised clustering analysis. Scatter plots and histograms were constructed from the mean betavalues from 3D vs. 2D, 3D vs. Ti and Ti vs. 2D analysis. In addition, analyses of Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were conducted to explore the putative biological functions in which mutL homolog (MLH), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), runtrelated transcription factor (RUNX), Ras association domain family (RASSF), cadherin 1 (CDH1), O6methylguanineDNA methyltransferase (MGMT) and P16 may serve a role. Quantitative methylationspecific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) was performed to determine the influence of culturing conditions on important gene expression. Results from PCA analysis indicated that the three samples were closely connected with each other. Venn diagrams revealed that certain differential methylation positions were common among the three sample groups, and 116 CpG positions were identified that appeared to be hypermethylated. The methylation patterns were more similar between 3D vs. 2D cultures compared with those between 3D vs. Ti or between Ti vs. 2D. Results of GO term and KEGG pathway analyses indicated that genes were enriched in four pathways, including transporter activity and Gprotein coupled receptor activity. In addition, QMSP analysis identified no notable differences in the methylation status of MLH, PTEN, RUNX, RASSF, CDH1, MGMT and P16 under 2D, 3D and Ti culture conditions. In conclusion, abnormal DNA methylation is related with breast cancer, and the methylation status did not change in breast cancer cells cultured in different conditions.. The present study aimed to explore the relationship between DNA methylation and breast cancer under different cell culture conditions. MCF7 breast cancer cells were cultured in twodimensional (2D), threedimensional (3D) and orthotopic transplantation (Ti) adhesion substrates. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used for global visualization of these three samples. The methylation status of CpG sites was examined by unsupervised clustering analysis. Scatter plots and histograms were constructed from the mean betavalues from 3D vs. 2D, 3D vs. Ti and Ti vs. 2D analysis. In addition, analyses of Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were conducted to explore the putative biological functions in which mutL homolog (MLH), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), runtrelated transcription factor (RUNX), Ras association domain family (RASSF), cadherin 1 (CDH1), O6methylguanineDNA methyltransferase (MGMT) and P16 may serve a role. Quantitative methylationspecific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) was performed to determine the influence of culturing conditions on important gene expression. Results from PCA analysis indicated that the three samples were closely connected with each other. Venn diagrams revealed that certain differential methylation positions were common among the three sample groups, and 116 CpG positions were identified that appeared to be hypermethylated. The methylation patterns were more similar between 3D vs. 2D cultures compared with those between 3D vs. Ti or between Ti vs. 2D. Results of GO term and KEGG pathway analyses indicated that genes were enriched in four pathways, including transporter activity and Gprotein coupled receptor activity. In addition, QMSP analysis identified no notable differences in the methylation status of MLH, PTEN, RUNX, RASSF, CDH1, MGMT and P16 under 2D, 3D and Ti culture conditions. In conclusion, abnormal DNA methylation is related with breast cancer, and the methylation status did not change in breast cancer cells cultured in different conditions.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, and the complexity of breast carcinogenesis is associated with epigenetic modification. There are several major classes of epigenetic enzymes that regulate chromatin activity. This review will focus on the nine mammalian protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) and the dysregulation of PRMT expression and function in breast cancer. This class of enzymes catalyse the mono- and (symmetric and asymmetric) di-methylation of arginine residues on histone and non-histone target proteins. PRMT signalling (and R methylation) drives cellular proliferation, cell invasion and metastasis, targeting (i) nuclear hormone receptor signalling, (ii) tumour suppressors, (iii) TGF-beta and EMT signalling and (iv) alternative splicing and DNA/chromatin stability, influencing the clinical and survival outcomes in breast cancer. Emerging reports suggest that PRMTs are also implicated in the development of drug/endocrine resistance providing another prospective avenue for the treatment of hormone resistance and associated metastasis. The complexity of PRMT signalling is further underscored by the degree of alternative splicing and the scope of variant isoforms (with distinct properties) within each PRMT family member. The evolution of PRMT inhibitors, and the ongoing clinical trials of PRMT inhibitors against a subgroup of solid cancers, coupled to the track record of lysine methyltransferases inhibitors in phase I/II clinical trials against cancer underscores the potential therapeutic utility of targeting PRMT epigenetic enzymes to improve survival outcomes in aggressive and metastatic breast cancer.. Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, and the complexity of breast carcinogenesis is associated with epigenetic modification. There are several major classes of epigenetic enzymes that regulate chromatin activity. This review will focus on the nine mammalian protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) and the dysregulation of PRMT expression and function in breast cancer. This class of enzymes catalyse the mono- and (symmetric and asymmetric) di-methylation of arginine residues on histone and non-histone target proteins. PRMT signalling (and R methylation) drives cellular proliferation, cell invasion and metastasis, targeting (i) nuclear hormone receptor signalling, (ii) tumour suppressors, (iii) TGF-beta and EMT signalling and (iv) alternative splicing and DNA/chromatin stability, influencing the clinical and survival outcomes in breast cancer. Emerging reports suggest that PRMTs are also implicated in the development of drug/endocrine resistance providing another prospective avenue for the treatment of hormone resistance and associated metastasis. The complexity of PRMT signalling is further underscored by the degree of alternative splicing and the scope of variant isoforms (with distinct properties) within each PRMT family member. The evolution of PRMT inhibitors, and the ongoing clinical trials of PRMT inhibitors against a subgroup of solid cancers, coupled to the track record of lysine methyltransferases inhibitors in phase I/II clinical trials against cancer underscores the potential therapeutic utility of targeting PRMT epigenetic enzymes to improve survival outcomes in aggressive and metastatic breast cancer.

Treatment of the breast cancer cell line, MDAMB468 with the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-azacytidine (5-AzaC) results in growth arrest, whereas the growth of the normal breast epithelial line DU99 (telomerase immortalized) is relatively unaffected. Comparing gene expression profiles of these two lines after 5-AzaC treatment, we identified 36 genes that had relatively low basal levels in MDAMB468 cells compared to the DU99 line and were induced in the cancer cell line but not in the normal breast epithelial line. Of these genes, 33 have associated CpG islands greater than 300 bp in length but only three have been previously described as targets for aberrant methylation in human cancer. Northern blotting for five of these genes (alpha-Catenin, DTR, FYN, GADD45a, and Zyxin) verified the array results. Further analysis of one of these genes, GADD45a, showed that 5-AzaC induced expression in five additional breast cancer cell lines with little or no induction in three additional lines derived from normal breast epithelial cells. The CpG island associated with GADD45a was analysed by bisulfite sequencing, sampling over 100 CpG dinucleotides. We found that four CpG's, located approximately 700 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site are methylated in the majority of breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors but not in DNA from normal breast epithelia or matched lymphocytes from cancer patients. Therefore, this simple method of dynamic transcriptional profiling yielded a series of novel methylation-sensitive genes in breast cancer including the BRCA1 and p53 responsive gene, GADD45a.. Treatment of the breast cancer cell line, MDAMB468 with the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-azacytidine (5-AzaC) results in growth arrest, whereas the growth of the normal breast epithelial line DU99 (telomerase immortalized) is relatively unaffected. Comparing gene expression profiles of these two lines after 5-AzaC treatment, we identified 36 genes that had relatively low basal levels in MDAMB468 cells compared to the DU99 line and were induced in the cancer cell line but not in the normal breast epithelial line. Of these genes, 33 have associated CpG islands greater than 300 bp in length but only three have been previously described as targets for aberrant methylation in human cancer. Northern blotting for five of these genes (alpha-Catenin, DTR, FYN, GADD45a, and Zyxin) verified the array results. Further analysis of one of these genes, GADD45a, showed that 5-AzaC induced expression in five additional breast cancer cell lines with little or no induction in three additional lines derived from normal breast epithelial cells. The CpG island associated with GADD45a was analysed by bisulfite sequencing, sampling over 100 CpG dinucleotides. We found that four CpG's, located approximately 700 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site are methylated in the majority of breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors but not in DNA from normal breast epithelia or matched lymphocytes from cancer patients. Therefore, this simple method of dynamic transcriptional profiling yielded a series of novel methylation-sensitive genes in breast cancer including the BRCA1 and p53 responsive gene, GADD45a.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of the WWOX gene in breast carcinoma and to analyze the relationship between its expression and methylation. METHODS: Methylation of the WWOX promoter and exon 1 as well as WWOX expression were determined by methylation-specific PCR, reverse transcription PCR and immunohistochemistry in 20 breast cancer tissue samples and corresponding nonneoplastic tissues. The expression of WWOX protein was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 2 breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: WWOX mRNA expression was reduced in breast cancer tissues as compared to adjacent tissues (p < 0.001). WWOX mRNA and protein expression was significantly reduced in breast cancer tissues with methylated WWOX CpG islands when compared to tissues without methylation (p < 0.001 and p = 0.008, respectively). Immunohistochemical analysis also showed that WWOX levels were significantly decreased in tissues with WWOX methylation (p = 0.001). WWOX mRNA and protein expression was greatly reduced in MDA-MB-231 cells, partly due to the methylation of WWOX CpG islands, and recovered after hydralazine treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Differential regulation of the WWOX gene plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of breast cancer, due partially to methylation of the WWOX DNA CpG islands.. OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of the WWOX gene in breast carcinoma and to analyze the relationship between its expression and methylation. METHODS: Methylation of the WWOX promoter and exon 1 as well as WWOX expression were determined by methylation-specific PCR, reverse transcription PCR and immunohistochemistry in 20 breast cancer tissue samples and corresponding nonneoplastic tissues. The expression of WWOX protein was evaluated by immunohistochemistry in 2 breast cancer cell lines. RESULTS: WWOX mRNA expression was reduced in breast cancer tissues as compared to adjacent tissues (p < 0.001). WWOX mRNA and protein expression was significantly reduced in breast cancer tissues with methylated WWOX CpG islands when compared to tissues without methylation (p < 0.001 and p = 0.008, respectively). Immunohistochemical analysis also showed that WWOX levels were significantly decreased in tissues with WWOX methylation (p = 0.001). WWOX mRNA and protein expression was greatly reduced in MDA-MB-231 cells, partly due to the methylation of WWOX CpG islands, and recovered after hydralazine treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Differential regulation of the WWOX gene plays an important role in the carcinogenesis of breast cancer, due partially to methylation of the WWOX DNA CpG islands.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Wang and colleagues report that CARM1, a protein arginine methyltransferase, specifically methylates BAF155/SMARCC1, a core subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling/tumor suppressor complex. This modification facilitates the targeting of BAF155 to genes of the c-Myc pathway and enhances breast cancer progression and metastasis.. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Wang and colleagues report that CARM1, a protein arginine methyltransferase, specifically methylates BAF155/SMARCC1, a core subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling/tumor suppressor complex. This modification facilitates the targeting of BAF155 to genes of the c-Myc pathway and enhances breast cancer progression and metastasis.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the methylation status of Runx3 promoter and Runx3 expression in breast lesion tissues. METHODS: One hundred and fourteen breast lesions, including 35 cases of fibroadenoma, 39 cases of intraductal carcinoma, 40 cases of invasive ductal carcinoma, and 33 cases of normal breast tissue from Fabruary 2010 to August 2012 were included in this study. Runx3 protein expression was assessed by immunohistochemical SP method; whereas methylation of Runx3 promoter was assessed by high resolution melting (HRM) analysis. RESULTS: Runx3 protein was mainly expressed in the cytoplasm of ductal epithelial cells. The expression rates of Runx3 in normal breast tissue, fibroadenoma, ductal carcinoma in situ, invasive ductal carcinoma were 87.9% (29/33), 85.7% (30/35), 53.8% (21/39), and 40.0% (16/40) respectively. The methylation rates of Runx3 promoter were 12.1% (4/33), 20.0% (7/35), 46.2% (18/39), and 57.5% (23/40), respectively. Correlation analysis between promoter methylation and protein expression of Runx3 in different breast tissue showed the r value in normal breast tissue, fibroadenoma, ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma was -0.431 (P = 0.012), -0.408 (P = 0.015), -0.589 (P = 0.000) and -0.743 (P = 0.000) respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Runx3 protein expression shows a downward trend in ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma, meanwhile its promoter methylation increases significantly. The methylation of Runx3 promoter may be one of the important factors in the occurrence and development of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the methylation status of Runx3 promoter and Runx3 expression in breast lesion tissues. METHODS: One hundred and fourteen breast lesions, including 35 cases of fibroadenoma, 39 cases of intraductal carcinoma, 40 cases of invasive ductal carcinoma, and 33 cases of normal breast tissue from Fabruary 2010 to August 2012 were included in this study. Runx3 protein expression was assessed by immunohistochemical SP method; whereas methylation of Runx3 promoter was assessed by high resolution melting (HRM) analysis. RESULTS: Runx3 protein was mainly expressed in the cytoplasm of ductal epithelial cells. The expression rates of Runx3 in normal breast tissue, fibroadenoma, ductal carcinoma in situ, invasive ductal carcinoma were 87.9% (29/33), 85.7% (30/35), 53.8% (21/39), and 40.0% (16/40) respectively. The methylation rates of Runx3 promoter were 12.1% (4/33), 20.0% (7/35), 46.2% (18/39), and 57.5% (23/40), respectively. Correlation analysis between promoter methylation and protein expression of Runx3 in different breast tissue showed the r value in normal breast tissue, fibroadenoma, ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma was -0.431 (P = 0.012), -0.408 (P = 0.015), -0.589 (P = 0.000) and -0.743 (P = 0.000) respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Runx3 protein expression shows a downward trend in ductal carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal carcinoma, meanwhile its promoter methylation increases significantly. The methylation of Runx3 promoter may be one of the important factors in the occurrence and development of breast cancer.

Background: Breast cancer has been the first death cause of cancer in women all over the world. Metastasis is believed to be the most important process for treating breast cancer. There is evidence that lncRNA MEG3 functions as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer metastasis. However, upstream regulation of MEG3 in breast cancer remain elusive. Therefore, it is critical to elucidate the underlying mechanism upstream MEG3 to regulate breast cancer metastasis. Methods: We employed RT-qPCR and Western blot to examine expression level of miR-506, DNMT1, SP1, SP3 and MEG3. Besides, methylation-specific PCR was used to determine the methylation level of MEG3 promoter. Wound healing assay and transwell invasion assay were utilized to measure migration and invasion ability of breast cancer cells, respectively. Results: SP was upregulated while miR-506 and MEG3 were downregulated in breast tumor tissue compared to adjacent normal breast tissues. In addition, we found that miR-506 regulated DNMT1 expression in an SP1/SP3-dependent manner, which reduced methylation level of MEG3 promoter and upregulated MEG3 expression. SP3 knockdown or miR-506 mimic suppressed migration and invasion of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells whereas overexpression of SP3 compromised miR-506-inhibited migration and invasion. Conclusions: Our data reveal a novel axis of miR-506/SP3/SP1/DNMT1/MEG3 in regulating migration and invasion of breast cancer cell lines, which provide rationales for developing effective therapies to treating metastatic breast cancers.. Background: Breast cancer has been the first death cause of cancer in women all over the world. Metastasis is believed to be the most important process for treating breast cancer. There is evidence that lncRNA MEG3 functions as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer metastasis. However, upstream regulation of MEG3 in breast cancer remain elusive. Therefore, it is critical to elucidate the underlying mechanism upstream MEG3 to regulate breast cancer metastasis. Methods: We employed RT-qPCR and Western blot to examine expression level of miR-506, DNMT1, SP1, SP3 and MEG3. Besides, methylation-specific PCR was used to determine the methylation level of MEG3 promoter. Wound healing assay and transwell invasion assay were utilized to measure migration and invasion ability of breast cancer cells, respectively. Results: SP was upregulated while miR-506 and MEG3 were downregulated in breast tumor tissue compared to adjacent normal breast tissues. In addition, we found that miR-506 regulated DNMT1 expression in an SP1/SP3-dependent manner, which reduced methylation level of MEG3 promoter and upregulated MEG3 expression. SP3 knockdown or miR-506 mimic suppressed migration and invasion of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells whereas overexpression of SP3 compromised miR-506-inhibited migration and invasion. Conclusions: Our data reveal a novel axis of miR-506/SP3/SP1/DNMT1/MEG3 in regulating migration and invasion of breast cancer cell lines, which provide rationales for developing effective therapies to treating metastatic breast cancers.

Methylation is an important silencing mechanism of breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) expression in sporadic ovarian cancer. However, the role of BRCA1 methylation in chemotherapy in sporadic ovarian cancer and the related pathways have not been understood completely. This study has determined the roles of BRCA1 hypermethylation in chemotherapy of sporadic ovarian cancer and its related signaling pathways. We used bisulfite sequencing, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and western blotting to check the methylation state and expression levels of BRCA1 of the following cell lines: platinum-sensitive human ovarian cancer cell line COC1, platinum-resistant cell line COC1/DDP, SKOV-3, and 5-Aza-dC treated COC1. The cisplatin sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells was examined by MTS (methyl-thiazol tetrazolium) assay. Tumorigenicity in vivo and DDP-based chemosensitivity were compared among the above cells. Phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway activation in ovarian cancer cells was studied by western blotting. The frequency of BRCA1 methylation in the COC1 cell line was higher than in COC1/DDP and SKOV-3 cell lines, whereas the mRNA and protein expression of BRCA1 were lower than in the COC1/DDP and SKOV-3 cell lines. DNA demethylation decreased the chemosensitivity of COC1 cells and partially increased the expression levels of BRCA1. The activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway was low in ovarian cancer cells. Our results indicate that hypermethylation of BRCA1 might play an important role in the chemosensitivity of ovarian cancer, and that the PI3K-Akt pathway is not involved in this response.. Methylation is an important silencing mechanism of breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) expression in sporadic ovarian cancer. However, the role of BRCA1 methylation in chemotherapy in sporadic ovarian cancer and the related pathways have not been understood completely. This study has determined the roles of BRCA1 hypermethylation in chemotherapy of sporadic ovarian cancer and its related signaling pathways. We used bisulfite sequencing, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and western blotting to check the methylation state and expression levels of BRCA1 of the following cell lines: platinum-sensitive human ovarian cancer cell line COC1, platinum-resistant cell line COC1/DDP, SKOV-3, and 5-Aza-dC treated COC1. The cisplatin sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells was examined by MTS (methyl-thiazol tetrazolium) assay. Tumorigenicity in vivo and DDP-based chemosensitivity were compared among the above cells. Phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway activation in ovarian cancer cells was studied by western blotting. The frequency of BRCA1 methylation in the COC1 cell line was higher than in COC1/DDP and SKOV-3 cell lines, whereas the mRNA and protein expression of BRCA1 were lower than in the COC1/DDP and SKOV-3 cell lines. DNA demethylation decreased the chemosensitivity of COC1 cells and partially increased the expression levels of BRCA1. The activation of the PI3K-Akt pathway was low in ovarian cancer cells. Our results indicate that hypermethylation of BRCA1 might play an important role in the chemosensitivity of ovarian cancer, and that the PI3K-Akt pathway is not involved in this response.

BACKGROUND: CREB3L1 (cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 3-like protein 1), a member of the unfolded protein response, has recently been identified as a metastasis suppressor in both breast and bladder cancer. METHODS: Quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and immunoblotting were used to determine the impact of histone deacetylation and DNA methylation inhibitors on CREB3L1 expression in breast cancer cell lines. Breast cancer cell lines and tumor samples were analyzed similarly, and CREB3L1 gene methylation was determined using sodium bisulfite conversion and DNA sequencing. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine nuclear versus cytoplasmic CREB3L1 protein. Large breast cancer database analyses were carried out to examine relationships between CREB3L1 gene methylation and mRNA expression in addition to CREB3L1 mRNA expression and prognosis. RESULTS: This study demonstrates that the low CREB3L1 expression previously seen in highly metastatic breast cancer cell lines is caused in part by epigenetic silencing. Treatment of several highly metastatic breast cancer cell lines that had low CREB3L1 expression with DNA methyltransferase and histone deacetylase inhibitors induced expression of CREB3L1, both mRNA and protein. In human breast tumors, CREB3L1 mRNA expression was upregulated in low and medium-grade tumors, most frequently of the luminal and HER2 amplified subtypes. In contrast, CREB3L1 expression was repressed in high-grade tumors, and its loss was most frequently associated with triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs). Importantly, bioinformatics analyses of tumor databases support these findings, with methylation of the CREB3L1 gene associated with TNBCs, and strongly negatively correlated with CREB3L1 mRNA expression. Decreased CREB3L1 mRNA expression was associated with increased tumor grade and reduced progression-free survival. An immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that low-grade breast tumors frequently had nuclear CREB3L1 protein, in contrast to the high-grade breast tumors in which CREB3L1 was cytoplasmic, suggesting that differential localization may also regulate CREB3L1 effectiveness in metastasis suppression. CONCLUSIONS: Our data further strengthens the role for CREB3L1 as a metastasis suppressor in breast cancer and demonstrates that epigenetic silencing is a major regulator of the loss of CREB3L1 expression. We also highlight that CREB3L1 expression is frequently altered in many cancer types suggesting that it could have a broader role in cancer progression and metastasis.. BACKGROUND: CREB3L1 (cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 3-like protein 1), a member of the unfolded protein response, has recently been identified as a metastasis suppressor in both breast and bladder cancer. METHODS: Quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) and immunoblotting were used to determine the impact of histone deacetylation and DNA methylation inhibitors on CREB3L1 expression in breast cancer cell lines. Breast cancer cell lines and tumor samples were analyzed similarly, and CREB3L1 gene methylation was determined using sodium bisulfite conversion and DNA sequencing. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine nuclear versus cytoplasmic CREB3L1 protein. Large breast cancer database analyses were carried out to examine relationships between CREB3L1 gene methylation and mRNA expression in addition to CREB3L1 mRNA expression and prognosis. RESULTS: This study demonstrates that the low CREB3L1 expression previously seen in highly metastatic breast cancer cell lines is caused in part by epigenetic silencing. Treatment of several highly metastatic breast cancer cell lines that had low CREB3L1 expression with DNA methyltransferase and histone deacetylase inhibitors induced expression of CREB3L1, both mRNA and protein. In human breast tumors, CREB3L1 mRNA expression was upregulated in low and medium-grade tumors, most frequently of the luminal and HER2 amplified subtypes. In contrast, CREB3L1 expression was repressed in high-grade tumors, and its loss was most frequently associated with triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs). Importantly, bioinformatics analyses of tumor databases support these findings, with methylation of the CREB3L1 gene associated with TNBCs, and strongly negatively correlated with CREB3L1 mRNA expression. Decreased CREB3L1 mRNA expression was associated with increased tumor grade and reduced progression-free survival. An immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that low-grade breast tumors frequently had nuclear CREB3L1 protein, in contrast to the high-grade breast tumors in which CREB3L1 was cytoplasmic, suggesting that differential localization may also regulate CREB3L1 effectiveness in metastasis suppression. CONCLUSIONS: Our data further strengthens the role for CREB3L1 as a metastasis suppressor in breast cancer and demonstrates that epigenetic silencing is a major regulator of the loss of CREB3L1 expression. We also highlight that CREB3L1 expression is frequently altered in many cancer types suggesting that it could have a broader role in cancer progression and metastasis.

Dysregulation of homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair has been implicated in breast carcinogenesis and chemosensitivity. Here, we investigated the methylation status of sixteen HR genes and analyzed their association with tumor subtypes and responses to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Core specimens were obtained before neoadjuvant chemotherapy from sixty cases of primary breast cancer of the following four subgroups: luminal breast cancer (LBC) with pathological complete response (pCR), LBC with stable disease, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) with pCR and TNBC with poor response. The aberrant DNA methylation status of the following HR related-genes was analyzed using bisulfite-pyrosequencing: BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1, MDC1, RNF8, RNF168, UBC13, ABRA1, PALB2, RAD50, RAD51, RAD51C, MRE11, NBS1, CtIP and ATM. Among the genes analyzed, only the incidence of BRCA1 and RNF8 methylation was significantly higher in TNBC than that in LBC. Whereas the incidence of BRCA1 methylation was tended to be higher in pCR cases than in poor-response cases in TNBC, that of RNF8 was significantly lower in pCR cases than in poor-response cases. Our results indicate that the methylation status of HR genes was not generally associated with TNBC subtype or chemosensitivity although hypermethylation of BRCA1 is associated with TNBC subtype and may impact chemosensitivity.. Dysregulation of homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair has been implicated in breast carcinogenesis and chemosensitivity. Here, we investigated the methylation status of sixteen HR genes and analyzed their association with tumor subtypes and responses to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Core specimens were obtained before neoadjuvant chemotherapy from sixty cases of primary breast cancer of the following four subgroups: luminal breast cancer (LBC) with pathological complete response (pCR), LBC with stable disease, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) with pCR and TNBC with poor response. The aberrant DNA methylation status of the following HR related-genes was analyzed using bisulfite-pyrosequencing: BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1, MDC1, RNF8, RNF168, UBC13, ABRA1, PALB2, RAD50, RAD51, RAD51C, MRE11, NBS1, CtIP and ATM. Among the genes analyzed, only the incidence of BRCA1 and RNF8 methylation was significantly higher in TNBC than that in LBC. Whereas the incidence of BRCA1 methylation was tended to be higher in pCR cases than in poor-response cases in TNBC, that of RNF8 was significantly lower in pCR cases than in poor-response cases. Our results indicate that the methylation status of HR genes was not generally associated with TNBC subtype or chemosensitivity although hypermethylation of BRCA1 is associated with TNBC subtype and may impact chemosensitivity.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs of approximately 20 nt in length that are capable of modulating gene expression post-transcriptionally. Although miRNAs have been implicated in cancer, including breast cancer, the regulation of miRNA transcription and the role of defects in this process in cancer is not well understood. In this study we have mapped the promoters of 93 breast cancer-associated miRNAs, and then looked for associations between DNA methylation of 15 of these promoters and miRNA expression in breast cancer cells. The miRNA promoters with clearest association between DNA methylation and expression included a previously described and a novel promoter of the Hsa-mir-200b cluster. The novel promoter of the Hsa-mir-200b cluster, denoted P2, is located approximately 2 kb upstream of the 5' stemloop and maps within a CpG island. P2 has comparable promoter activity to the previously reported promoter (P1), and is able to drive the expression of miR-200b in its endogenous genomic context. DNA methylation of both P1 and P2 was inversely associated with miR-200b expression in eight out of nine breast cancer cell lines, and in vitro methylation of both promoters repressed their activity in reporter assays. In clinical samples, P1 and P2 were differentially methylated with methylation inversely associated with miR-200b expression. P1 was hypermethylated in metastatic lymph nodes compared with matched primary breast tumours whereas P2 hypermethylation was associated with loss of either oestrogen receptor or progesterone receptor. Hypomethylation of P2 was associated with gain of HER2 and androgen receptor expression. These data suggest an association between miR-200b regulation and breast cancer subtype and a potential use of DNA methylation of miRNA promoters as a component of a suite of breast cancer biomarkers.. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs of approximately 20 nt in length that are capable of modulating gene expression post-transcriptionally. Although miRNAs have been implicated in cancer, including breast cancer, the regulation of miRNA transcription and the role of defects in this process in cancer is not well understood. In this study we have mapped the promoters of 93 breast cancer-associated miRNAs, and then looked for associations between DNA methylation of 15 of these promoters and miRNA expression in breast cancer cells. The miRNA promoters with clearest association between DNA methylation and expression included a previously described and a novel promoter of the Hsa-mir-200b cluster. The novel promoter of the Hsa-mir-200b cluster, denoted P2, is located approximately 2 kb upstream of the 5' stemloop and maps within a CpG island. P2 has comparable promoter activity to the previously reported promoter (P1), and is able to drive the expression of miR-200b in its endogenous genomic context. DNA methylation of both P1 and P2 was inversely associated with miR-200b expression in eight out of nine breast cancer cell lines, and in vitro methylation of both promoters repressed their activity in reporter assays. In clinical samples, P1 and P2 were differentially methylated with methylation inversely associated with miR-200b expression. P1 was hypermethylated in metastatic lymph nodes compared with matched primary breast tumours whereas P2 hypermethylation was associated with loss of either oestrogen receptor or progesterone receptor. Hypomethylation of P2 was associated with gain of HER2 and androgen receptor expression. These data suggest an association between miR-200b regulation and breast cancer subtype and a potential use of DNA methylation of miRNA promoters as a component of a suite of breast cancer biomarkers.

The hypermethylation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) promoter is a common molecular alteration in sporadic breast cancer (BC), but its involvement in familial BC remains largely unknown. In the present study, we analyzed the methylation statuses of four regions (ER1, ER3, ER4, and ER5) of the ERalpha promoter and the ERalpha expression levels of 113 familial BC patients in a Han Chinese Population from northeastern China and evaluated the association between major clinicopathological features and the hypermethylation statuses of the ERalpha gene. Tumor samples were analyzed for ERalpha methylation status by the methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction for ERalpha, PR, p53, BRCA-1, and BRCA-2 by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining and for Her-2 status by IHC and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). ERalpha methylation was observed in tumor tissues in 47/113 (41.6%) familial BC patients. There were no significant differences in the methylation statuses among ER1 (20.4%), ER3 (18.6%), ER4 (17.7%), and ER5 (19.5%; chi (2) = 3.89, p > 0.05). An association between ERalpha expression level and its promoter methylation level was found. In addition, ERalpha methylation was significantly correlated with tumor size, PR expression, p53 nuclear accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 statuses. In conclusion, in familial BC patients, the level of ERalpha gene promoter methylation correlates with ERalpha expression, PR, p53 nuclear accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 statuses. Epigenetic alteration of ERalpha gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis of familial BC.. The hypermethylation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) promoter is a common molecular alteration in sporadic breast cancer (BC), but its involvement in familial BC remains largely unknown. In the present study, we analyzed the methylation statuses of four regions (ER1, ER3, ER4, and ER5) of the ERalpha promoter and the ERalpha expression levels of 113 familial BC patients in a Han Chinese Population from northeastern China and evaluated the association between major clinicopathological features and the hypermethylation statuses of the ERalpha gene. Tumor samples were analyzed for ERalpha methylation status by the methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction for ERalpha, PR, p53, BRCA-1, and BRCA-2 by immunohistochemical (IHC) staining and for Her-2 status by IHC and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). ERalpha methylation was observed in tumor tissues in 47/113 (41.6%) familial BC patients. There were no significant differences in the methylation statuses among ER1 (20.4%), ER3 (18.6%), ER4 (17.7%), and ER5 (19.5%; chi (2) = 3.89, p > 0.05). An association between ERalpha expression level and its promoter methylation level was found. In addition, ERalpha methylation was significantly correlated with tumor size, PR expression, p53 nuclear accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 statuses. In conclusion, in familial BC patients, the level of ERalpha gene promoter methylation correlates with ERalpha expression, PR, p53 nuclear accumulation, and BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 statuses. Epigenetic alteration of ERalpha gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis of familial BC.

To explore the molecular mechanisms for the similarities between inherited and noninherited forms of breast cancer, we tested the hypothesis that inactivation of BRCA1 by promoter hypermethylation is associated with reduced gene copy number and chromosome 17 aneusomy as observed in tumors from BRCA1 mutation carriers. Using a combination of methylation-specific PCR analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization, we observed varying degrees of promoter methylation in 39 of 131 (29.8%) primary tumors. Despite significant tumor heterogeneity, mean copy numbers of BRCA1 and CEP17 per cell were lower in methylated cases compared with unmethylated cases [1.78 versus 2.30 (P = 0.001) and 1.85 versus 2.29 (P = 0.005), respectively]. Methylation was more frequently observed in younger women (P = 0.05) with high-grade (P = 0.001), estrogen receptor-negative (P = 0.04), and progesterone receptor-negative (P = 0.01) tumors. Moreover, methylation was associated with reduced or absent BRCA1 transcripts, which was reversible in the heavily BRCA1-methylated cell line UACC3199 following treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and trichostatin A. We identified five CpGs at positions -533, -355, -173, -21, and +44 as critical in the reexpression of BRCA1. We conclude that BRCA1 methylation contributes to a subset of sporadic breast cancers with the resulting molecular and clinicopathologic phenotype similar to that of hereditary BRCA1-associated breast cancers. Our data support a model of carcinogenesis in which BRCA1 promoter methylation may serve as a "first hit," much like an inherited germ line mutation, and promote tumor progression down a restricted set of molecular pathways.. To explore the molecular mechanisms for the similarities between inherited and noninherited forms of breast cancer, we tested the hypothesis that inactivation of BRCA1 by promoter hypermethylation is associated with reduced gene copy number and chromosome 17 aneusomy as observed in tumors from BRCA1 mutation carriers. Using a combination of methylation-specific PCR analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization, we observed varying degrees of promoter methylation in 39 of 131 (29.8%) primary tumors. Despite significant tumor heterogeneity, mean copy numbers of BRCA1 and CEP17 per cell were lower in methylated cases compared with unmethylated cases [1.78 versus 2.30 (P = 0.001) and 1.85 versus 2.29 (P = 0.005), respectively]. Methylation was more frequently observed in younger women (P = 0.05) with high-grade (P = 0.001), estrogen receptor-negative (P = 0.04), and progesterone receptor-negative (P = 0.01) tumors. Moreover, methylation was associated with reduced or absent BRCA1 transcripts, which was reversible in the heavily BRCA1-methylated cell line UACC3199 following treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and trichostatin A. We identified five CpGs at positions -533, -355, -173, -21, and +44 as critical in the reexpression of BRCA1. We conclude that BRCA1 methylation contributes to a subset of sporadic breast cancers with the resulting molecular and clinicopathologic phenotype similar to that of hereditary BRCA1-associated breast cancers. Our data support a model of carcinogenesis in which BRCA1 promoter methylation may serve as a "first hit," much like an inherited germ line mutation, and promote tumor progression down a restricted set of molecular pathways.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ER) and its ligand estrogen play vital roles in the development, progression and treatment of breast cancer. An increasing number of studies have also provided evidence linking disruption of the Fanconi anemia/BRCA cascade to breast cancer. Our objectives were to examine the methylation status and expression profiles of ER, correlate the findings with BRCA1 and FANCF methylation and map the critical CpGs for ER expression. We found that the CpG islands in the 5' region of the ER gene are methylated in 59 of 120 (49.2%) primary breast cancers, including 45 of 59 ER-negative tumors (76.3%, P < 0.00001). In addition, we observed a strong correlation between ER promoter and BRCA1 promoter methylation (odds ratio 3.12, 95% confidence interval 1.10-9.68, P = 0.02). In contrast, FANCF methylation was rare in breast tumors: one of 120 (0.8%). ER methylation was associated with high tumor grade (60.4% methylated vs. 39.6% unmethylated in grade 3 tumors, P = 0.04) and tumor subtype (P = 0.03). Though small in number, all tumors of the medullary subtype were ER methylated. In contrast, the lobular subtype had the least methylation (23.1% methylated vs. 76.9% unmethylated). After treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with 5-aza-cytidine (5-aza-dC) and trichostatin, which resulted in re-expression of ER mRNA, we localized dramatic demethylation effects to CpG islands in positions +68, +165, +192, +195, +337, +341 and +405 from transcription start site of the ER promoter. These data suggest that unlike FANCF, both ER and BRCA1 are specifically targeted for methylation in sporadic breast cancers, a phenomenon that should be explored for development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches.. Estrogen receptor alpha (ER) and its ligand estrogen play vital roles in the development, progression and treatment of breast cancer. An increasing number of studies have also provided evidence linking disruption of the Fanconi anemia/BRCA cascade to breast cancer. Our objectives were to examine the methylation status and expression profiles of ER, correlate the findings with BRCA1 and FANCF methylation and map the critical CpGs for ER expression. We found that the CpG islands in the 5' region of the ER gene are methylated in 59 of 120 (49.2%) primary breast cancers, including 45 of 59 ER-negative tumors (76.3%, P < 0.00001). In addition, we observed a strong correlation between ER promoter and BRCA1 promoter methylation (odds ratio 3.12, 95% confidence interval 1.10-9.68, P = 0.02). In contrast, FANCF methylation was rare in breast tumors: one of 120 (0.8%). ER methylation was associated with high tumor grade (60.4% methylated vs. 39.6% unmethylated in grade 3 tumors, P = 0.04) and tumor subtype (P = 0.03). Though small in number, all tumors of the medullary subtype were ER methylated. In contrast, the lobular subtype had the least methylation (23.1% methylated vs. 76.9% unmethylated). After treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with 5-aza-cytidine (5-aza-dC) and trichostatin, which resulted in re-expression of ER mRNA, we localized dramatic demethylation effects to CpG islands in positions +68, +165, +192, +195, +337, +341 and +405 from transcription start site of the ER promoter. These data suggest that unlike FANCF, both ER and BRCA1 are specifically targeted for methylation in sporadic breast cancers, a phenomenon that should be explored for development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches.

Recently, we found that G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) protein expression decreased during breast carcinogenesis, and that GPER promoter is methylated. Here we analyzed GPER promoter methylation in 260 primary breast cancer specimens by methylation-specific polymerized chain reaction. The results demonstrated that GPER protein down-regulation significantly correlated with GPER promoter hypermethylation (p < .001). Comparison of 108 tumors and matched normal breast tissues indicated a significant GPER down-regulation in cancer tissues correlating with GPER promoter hypermethylation (p < .001). The latter was an unfavorable factor for overall survival of patients with triple-negative breast cancer (p = .025). Thus GPER promoter hypermethylation might be used as a prognostic factor.. Recently, we found that G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) protein expression decreased during breast carcinogenesis, and that GPER promoter is methylated. Here we analyzed GPER promoter methylation in 260 primary breast cancer specimens by methylation-specific polymerized chain reaction. The results demonstrated that GPER protein down-regulation significantly correlated with GPER promoter hypermethylation (p < .001). Comparison of 108 tumors and matched normal breast tissues indicated a significant GPER down-regulation in cancer tissues correlating with GPER promoter hypermethylation (p < .001). The latter was an unfavorable factor for overall survival of patients with triple-negative breast cancer (p = .025). Thus GPER promoter hypermethylation might be used as a prognostic factor.

Tumour heterogeneity describes the coexistence of divergent tumour cell clones within tumours, which is often caused by underlying epigenetic changes. DNA methylation is commonly regarded as a significant regulator that differs across cells and tissues. In this study, we comprehensively reviewed research progress on estimating of tumour heterogeneity. Bioinformatics-based analysis of DNA methylation has revealed the evolutionary relationships between breast cancer cell lines and tissues. Further analysis of the DNA methylation profiles in 33 breast cancer-related cell lines identified cell line-specific methylation patterns. Next, we reviewed the computational methods in inferring clonal evolution of tumours from different perspectives and then proposed a deconvolution strategy for modelling cell subclonal populations dynamics in breast cancer tissues based on DNA methylation. Further analysis of simulated cancer tissues and real cell lines revealed that this approach exhibits satisfactory performance and relative stability in estimating the composition and proportions of cellular subpopulations. The application of this strategy to breast cancer individuals of the Cancer Genome Atlas's identified different cellular subpopulations with distinct molecular phenotypes. Moreover, the current and potential future applications of this deconvolution strategy to clinical breast cancer research are discussed, and emphasis was placed on the DNA methylation-based recognition of intra-tumour heterogeneity. The wide use of these methods for estimating heterogeneity to further clinical cohorts will improve our understanding of neoplastic progression and the design of therapeutic interventions for treating breast cancer and other malignancies.. Tumour heterogeneity describes the coexistence of divergent tumour cell clones within tumours, which is often caused by underlying epigenetic changes. DNA methylation is commonly regarded as a significant regulator that differs across cells and tissues. In this study, we comprehensively reviewed research progress on estimating of tumour heterogeneity. Bioinformatics-based analysis of DNA methylation has revealed the evolutionary relationships between breast cancer cell lines and tissues. Further analysis of the DNA methylation profiles in 33 breast cancer-related cell lines identified cell line-specific methylation patterns. Next, we reviewed the computational methods in inferring clonal evolution of tumours from different perspectives and then proposed a deconvolution strategy for modelling cell subclonal populations dynamics in breast cancer tissues based on DNA methylation. Further analysis of simulated cancer tissues and real cell lines revealed that this approach exhibits satisfactory performance and relative stability in estimating the composition and proportions of cellular subpopulations. The application of this strategy to breast cancer individuals of the Cancer Genome Atlas's identified different cellular subpopulations with distinct molecular phenotypes. Moreover, the current and potential future applications of this deconvolution strategy to clinical breast cancer research are discussed, and emphasis was placed on the DNA methylation-based recognition of intra-tumour heterogeneity. The wide use of these methods for estimating heterogeneity to further clinical cohorts will improve our understanding of neoplastic progression and the design of therapeutic interventions for treating breast cancer and other malignancies.

The methylated DNA immunoprecipitation microarray (MeDIP-chip) is a genome-wide, high-resolution approach to detect DNA methylation in whole genome or CpG (cytosine base followed by a guanine base) islands. The method utilizes anti-methylcytosine antibody to immunoprecipitate DNA that contains highly methylated CpG sites. Enriched methylated DNA can be interrogated using DNA microarrays or by massive parallel sequencing techniques. This combined approach allows researchers to rapidly identify methylated regions in a genome-wide manner, and compare DNA methylation patterns between two samples with diversely different DNA methylation status. MeDIP-chip has been applied successfully for analyses of methylated DNA in the different targets including animal and plant tissues. Here we present a MeDIP-chip protocol that is routinely used in our laboratory, illustrated with specific examples from MeDIP-chip analysis of breast cancer cell lines. Potential technical pitfalls and solutions are also provided to serve as workflow guidelines.. The methylated DNA immunoprecipitation microarray (MeDIP-chip) is a genome-wide, high-resolution approach to detect DNA methylation in whole genome or CpG (cytosine base followed by a guanine base) islands. The method utilizes anti-methylcytosine antibody to immunoprecipitate DNA that contains highly methylated CpG sites. Enriched methylated DNA can be interrogated using DNA microarrays or by massive parallel sequencing techniques. This combined approach allows researchers to rapidly identify methylated regions in a genome-wide manner, and compare DNA methylation patterns between two samples with diversely different DNA methylation status. MeDIP-chip has been applied successfully for analyses of methylated DNA in the different targets including animal and plant tissues. Here we present a MeDIP-chip protocol that is routinely used in our laboratory, illustrated with specific examples from MeDIP-chip analysis of breast cancer cell lines. Potential technical pitfalls and solutions are also provided to serve as workflow guidelines.

PURPOSE: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-DNA adducts have been associated with breast cancer incidence. Aberrant changes in DNA methylation may be an early event in carcinogenesis. However, possible relations between PAH-DNA adducts, methylation, and breast cancer are unknown. The objectives of this study were to (1) assess associations between PAH-DNA adducts, and breast cancer, stratified by DNA methylation markers and (2) examine interactions between adducts and DNA methylation in association with breast cancer and tumor subtype. METHODS: In a population-based case-control study, promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes was measured in tumor tissue (n = 765-851 cases). Blood DNA from breast cancer cases (n = 873) and controls (n = 941) was used to assess PAH-DNA adducts and global methylation. Logistic regression was used to estimate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI); and the ratio of the OR (ROR) was used to assess heterogeneity. RESULTS: Women with detectable PAH-DNA adducts and methylated RARbeta (ROR 2.69, 95% CI 1.02-7.12; p for interaction = 0.03) or APC (ROR 1.76, 95% CI 0.87-3.58; p for interaction = 0.09) genes were more likely to have hormone receptor-positive tumors than other subtypes. Interactions with other methylation markers were not apparent (p >/= 0.10). The association between adducts and breast cancer did not vary by methylation status of the tumor nor did adducts associate with global methylation in the controls. CONCLUSIONS: Gene-specific methylation of RARbeta, and perhaps APC, may interact with PAH-DNA adducts to increase risk of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. There was little evidence that adducts were associated with or interacted with other methylation markers of interest.. PURPOSE: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-DNA adducts have been associated with breast cancer incidence. Aberrant changes in DNA methylation may be an early event in carcinogenesis. However, possible relations between PAH-DNA adducts, methylation, and breast cancer are unknown. The objectives of this study were to (1) assess associations between PAH-DNA adducts, and breast cancer, stratified by DNA methylation markers and (2) examine interactions between adducts and DNA methylation in association with breast cancer and tumor subtype. METHODS: In a population-based case-control study, promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes was measured in tumor tissue (n = 765-851 cases). Blood DNA from breast cancer cases (n = 873) and controls (n = 941) was used to assess PAH-DNA adducts and global methylation. Logistic regression was used to estimate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI); and the ratio of the OR (ROR) was used to assess heterogeneity. RESULTS: Women with detectable PAH-DNA adducts and methylated RARbeta (ROR 2.69, 95% CI 1.02-7.12; p for interaction = 0.03) or APC (ROR 1.76, 95% CI 0.87-3.58; p for interaction = 0.09) genes were more likely to have hormone receptor-positive tumors than other subtypes. Interactions with other methylation markers were not apparent (p >/= 0.10). The association between adducts and breast cancer did not vary by methylation status of the tumor nor did adducts associate with global methylation in the controls. CONCLUSIONS: Gene-specific methylation of RARbeta, and perhaps APC, may interact with PAH-DNA adducts to increase risk of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. There was little evidence that adducts were associated with or interacted with other methylation markers of interest.

BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoke, diet and indoor/outdoor air pollution, all major sources of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), have been associated with breast cancer. Aberrant methylation may be an early event in carcinogenesis, but whether PAHs influence the epigenome is unclear, particularly in breast tissue where methylation may be most relevant. We aimed to evaluate the role of methylation in the association between PAHs and breast cancer. METHODS: In a population-based case-control study, we measured promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes in breast tumor tissue (n=765-851 cases) and global methylation in peripheral blood (1055 cases/1101 controls). PAH sources (current active smoking, residential environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), vehicular traffic, synthetic log burning, and grilled/smoked meat intake) were evaluated separately. Logistic regression was used to estimate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: When comparing methylated versus unmethylated genes, synthetic log use was associated with increased ORs for CDH1 (OR=2.26, 95%CI=1.06-4.79), HIN1 (OR=2.14, 95%CI=1.34-3.42) and RARbeta (OR=1.80, 95%CI=1.16-2.78) and decreased ORs for BRCA1 (OR=0.44, 95%CI=0.30-0.66). Residential ETS was associated with decreased ORs for ESR1 (OR=0.74, 95%CI=0.56-0.99) and CCND2 methylation (OR=0.65, 95%CI=0.44-0.96). Current smoking and vehicular traffic were associated with decreased ORs for DAPK (OR=0.53, 95%CI=0.28-0.99) and increased ORs for TWIST1 methylation (OR=2.79, 95%CI=1.24-6.30), respectively. In controls, synthetic log use was inversely associated with LINE-1 (OR=0.59, 95%CI=0.41-0.86). DISCUSSION: PAH sources were associated with hypo- and hypermethylation at multiple promoter regions in breast tumors and LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood of controls. Methylation may be a potential biologic mechanism for the associations between PAHs and breast cancer incidence.. BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoke, diet and indoor/outdoor air pollution, all major sources of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), have been associated with breast cancer. Aberrant methylation may be an early event in carcinogenesis, but whether PAHs influence the epigenome is unclear, particularly in breast tissue where methylation may be most relevant. We aimed to evaluate the role of methylation in the association between PAHs and breast cancer. METHODS: In a population-based case-control study, we measured promoter methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes in breast tumor tissue (n=765-851 cases) and global methylation in peripheral blood (1055 cases/1101 controls). PAH sources (current active smoking, residential environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), vehicular traffic, synthetic log burning, and grilled/smoked meat intake) were evaluated separately. Logistic regression was used to estimate adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: When comparing methylated versus unmethylated genes, synthetic log use was associated with increased ORs for CDH1 (OR=2.26, 95%CI=1.06-4.79), HIN1 (OR=2.14, 95%CI=1.34-3.42) and RARbeta (OR=1.80, 95%CI=1.16-2.78) and decreased ORs for BRCA1 (OR=0.44, 95%CI=0.30-0.66). Residential ETS was associated with decreased ORs for ESR1 (OR=0.74, 95%CI=0.56-0.99) and CCND2 methylation (OR=0.65, 95%CI=0.44-0.96). Current smoking and vehicular traffic were associated with decreased ORs for DAPK (OR=0.53, 95%CI=0.28-0.99) and increased ORs for TWIST1 methylation (OR=2.79, 95%CI=1.24-6.30), respectively. In controls, synthetic log use was inversely associated with LINE-1 (OR=0.59, 95%CI=0.41-0.86). DISCUSSION: PAH sources were associated with hypo- and hypermethylation at multiple promoter regions in breast tumors and LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood of controls. Methylation may be a potential biologic mechanism for the associations between PAHs and breast cancer incidence.

BACKGROUND: A growing body of evidence supports the hypotheses that the retinoic acid receptor beta2 (RAR-beta2) gene is a tumor suppressor gene and that the chemopreventive effects of retinoids are due to induction of RAR-beta2. RAR-beta2 expression is reduced in many malignant tumors, and we examined whether methylation of RAR-beta2 could be responsible for this silencing. METHODS: RAR-beta2 expression was studied by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis in eight breast cancer cell lines that were either treated with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and subsequently with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) or left untreated. Sodium bisulfite genomic sequencing was used to determine the locations of 5-methylcytosines in the RAR-beta2 genes of three of these cell lines. In 16 breast cancer biopsy specimens and non-neoplastic breast tissue, methylation-specific PCR was used to determine the methylation status of RAR-beta2, and, in 13 of the specimens, RT-PCR analysis was used to detect RAR-beta2 expression. RESULTS: Cell lines SK-BR-3, T-47D, ZR-75-1, and MCF7 exhibited expression of RAR-beta2 only after demethylation and treatment with ATRA. The first exon expressed in the RAR-beta2 transcript was methylated in cell lines ZR-75-1 and SK-BR-3. Six breast cancer specimens showed methylation in the same region of the gene. No expression of RAR-beta2 was found in any grade III lesion. An inverse association between methylation and gene expression was found in all grade II lesions. The RAR-beta2 gene from non-neoplastic breast tissue was unmethylated and expressed. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of the RAR-beta2 gene may be an initial step in breast carcinogenesis; treatment of cancer patients with demethylating agents followed by retinoic acid may offer a new therapeutic modality.. BACKGROUND: A growing body of evidence supports the hypotheses that the retinoic acid receptor beta2 (RAR-beta2) gene is a tumor suppressor gene and that the chemopreventive effects of retinoids are due to induction of RAR-beta2. RAR-beta2 expression is reduced in many malignant tumors, and we examined whether methylation of RAR-beta2 could be responsible for this silencing. METHODS: RAR-beta2 expression was studied by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis in eight breast cancer cell lines that were either treated with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and subsequently with all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) or left untreated. Sodium bisulfite genomic sequencing was used to determine the locations of 5-methylcytosines in the RAR-beta2 genes of three of these cell lines. In 16 breast cancer biopsy specimens and non-neoplastic breast tissue, methylation-specific PCR was used to determine the methylation status of RAR-beta2, and, in 13 of the specimens, RT-PCR analysis was used to detect RAR-beta2 expression. RESULTS: Cell lines SK-BR-3, T-47D, ZR-75-1, and MCF7 exhibited expression of RAR-beta2 only after demethylation and treatment with ATRA. The first exon expressed in the RAR-beta2 transcript was methylated in cell lines ZR-75-1 and SK-BR-3. Six breast cancer specimens showed methylation in the same region of the gene. No expression of RAR-beta2 was found in any grade III lesion. An inverse association between methylation and gene expression was found in all grade II lesions. The RAR-beta2 gene from non-neoplastic breast tissue was unmethylated and expressed. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of the RAR-beta2 gene may be an initial step in breast carcinogenesis; treatment of cancer patients with demethylating agents followed by retinoic acid may offer a new therapeutic modality.

BACKGROUND: Monitoring treatment and early detection of fatal breast cancer (BC) remains a major unmet need. Aberrant circulating DNA methylation (DNAme) patterns are likely to provide a highly specific cancer signal. We hypothesized that cell-free DNAme markers could indicate disseminated breast cancer, even in the presence of substantial quantities of background DNA. METHODS: We used reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) of 31 tissues and established serum assays based on ultra-high coverage bisulfite sequencing in two independent prospective serum sets (n = 110). The clinical use of one specific region, EFC#93, was validated in 419 patients (in both pre- and post-adjuvant chemotherapy samples) from SUCCESS (Simultaneous Study of Gemcitabine-Docetaxel Combination adjuvant treatment, as well as Extended Bisphosphonate and Surveillance-Trial) and 925 women (pre-diagnosis) from the UKCTOCS (UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening) population cohort, with overall survival and occurrence of incident breast cancer (which will or will not lead to death), respectively, as primary endpoints. RESULTS: A total of 18 BC specific DNAme patterns were discovered in tissue, of which the top six were further tested in serum. The best candidate, EFC#93, was validated for clinical use. EFC#93 was an independent poor prognostic marker in pre-chemotherapy samples (hazard ratio [HR] for death = 7.689) and superior to circulating tumor cells (CTCs) (HR for death = 5.681). More than 70% of patients with both CTCs and EFC#93 serum DNAme positivity in their pre-chemotherapy samples relapsed within five years. EFC#93-positive disseminated disease in post-chemotherapy samples seems to respond to anti-hormonal treatment. The presence of EFC#93 serum DNAme identified 42.9% and 25% of women who were diagnosed with a fatal BC within 3-6 and 6-12 months of sample donation, respectively, with a specificity of 88%. The sensitivity with respect to detecting fatal BC was ~ 4-fold higher compared to non-fatal BC. CONCLUSIONS: Detection of EFC#93 serum DNAme patterns offers a new tool for early diagnosis and management of disseminated breast cancers. Clinical trials are required to assess whether EFC#93-positive women in the absence of radiological detectable breast cancers will benefit from anti-hormonal treatment before the breast lesions become clinically apparent.. BACKGROUND: Monitoring treatment and early detection of fatal breast cancer (BC) remains a major unmet need. Aberrant circulating DNA methylation (DNAme) patterns are likely to provide a highly specific cancer signal. We hypothesized that cell-free DNAme markers could indicate disseminated breast cancer, even in the presence of substantial quantities of background DNA. METHODS: We used reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) of 31 tissues and established serum assays based on ultra-high coverage bisulfite sequencing in two independent prospective serum sets (n = 110). The clinical use of one specific region, EFC#93, was validated in 419 patients (in both pre- and post-adjuvant chemotherapy samples) from SUCCESS (Simultaneous Study of Gemcitabine-Docetaxel Combination adjuvant treatment, as well as Extended Bisphosphonate and Surveillance-Trial) and 925 women (pre-diagnosis) from the UKCTOCS (UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening) population cohort, with overall survival and occurrence of incident breast cancer (which will or will not lead to death), respectively, as primary endpoints. RESULTS: A total of 18 BC specific DNAme patterns were discovered in tissue, of which the top six were further tested in serum. The best candidate, EFC#93, was validated for clinical use. EFC#93 was an independent poor prognostic marker in pre-chemotherapy samples (hazard ratio [HR] for death = 7.689) and superior to circulating tumor cells (CTCs) (HR for death = 5.681). More than 70% of patients with both CTCs and EFC#93 serum DNAme positivity in their pre-chemotherapy samples relapsed within five years. EFC#93-positive disseminated disease in post-chemotherapy samples seems to respond to anti-hormonal treatment. The presence of EFC#93 serum DNAme identified 42.9% and 25% of women who were diagnosed with a fatal BC within 3-6 and 6-12 months of sample donation, respectively, with a specificity of 88%. The sensitivity with respect to detecting fatal BC was ~ 4-fold higher compared to non-fatal BC. CONCLUSIONS: Detection of EFC#93 serum DNAme patterns offers a new tool for early diagnosis and management of disseminated breast cancers. Clinical trials are required to assess whether EFC#93-positive women in the absence of radiological detectable breast cancers will benefit from anti-hormonal treatment before the breast lesions become clinically apparent.

Knowledge about breast carcinogenesis has accumulated during the last decades but has barely been translated into strategies for early detection or prevention of this common disease. Changes in DNA methylation have been recognized as one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia and hypermethylation of gene-promoter regions is being revealed as one of the most frequent mechanisms of loss of gene function. The heritability of methylation states and the secondary nature of the decision to attract or exclude methylation support the idea that DNA methylation is adapted for a specific cellular memory. According to Hanahan and Weinberg, there are six novel capabilities a cell has to acquire to become a cancer cell: limitless replicative potential, self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of programmed cell death, sustained angiogenesis and tissue invasion and metastasis. This review highlights how DNA-methylation contributes to these features and offers suggestions about how these changes could be prevented, reverted or used as a 'tag' for early detection of breast cancer or, preferably, for detection of premalignant changes.. Knowledge about breast carcinogenesis has accumulated during the last decades but has barely been translated into strategies for early detection or prevention of this common disease. Changes in DNA methylation have been recognized as one of the most common molecular alterations in human neoplasia and hypermethylation of gene-promoter regions is being revealed as one of the most frequent mechanisms of loss of gene function. The heritability of methylation states and the secondary nature of the decision to attract or exclude methylation support the idea that DNA methylation is adapted for a specific cellular memory. According to Hanahan and Weinberg, there are six novel capabilities a cell has to acquire to become a cancer cell: limitless replicative potential, self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals, evasion of programmed cell death, sustained angiogenesis and tissue invasion and metastasis. This review highlights how DNA-methylation contributes to these features and offers suggestions about how these changes could be prevented, reverted or used as a 'tag' for early detection of breast cancer or, preferably, for detection of premalignant changes.

We have generated DNA methylation profiles of 148 human breast tumors and found significant differences in hormone receptor (HR) status between clusters of DNA methylation profiles. Of 35 DNA methylation markers analyzed, the ESR1 gene, encoding estrogen receptor alpha, proved to be the best predictor of progesterone receptor status, whereas methylation of the PGR gene, encoding progesterone receptor, was the best predictor of estrogen receptor status. ESR1 methylation outperformed HR status as a predictor of clinical response in patients treated with the antiestrogen tamoxifen, whereas promoter methylation of the CYP1B1 gene, encoding a tamoxifen- and estradiol-metabolizing cytochrome p450, predicted response differentially in tamoxifen-treated and nontamoxifen-treated patients. High levels of promoter methylation of the ARHI gene, encoding a RAS-related small G-protein, were strongly predictive of good survival in patients who had not received tamoxifen therapy. Our results reveal an as yet unrecognized degree of interaction between DNA methylation and HR biology in breast cancer cells and suggest potentially clinically useful novel DNA methylation predictors of response to hormonal and non-hormonal breast cancer therapy.. We have generated DNA methylation profiles of 148 human breast tumors and found significant differences in hormone receptor (HR) status between clusters of DNA methylation profiles. Of 35 DNA methylation markers analyzed, the ESR1 gene, encoding estrogen receptor alpha, proved to be the best predictor of progesterone receptor status, whereas methylation of the PGR gene, encoding progesterone receptor, was the best predictor of estrogen receptor status. ESR1 methylation outperformed HR status as a predictor of clinical response in patients treated with the antiestrogen tamoxifen, whereas promoter methylation of the CYP1B1 gene, encoding a tamoxifen- and estradiol-metabolizing cytochrome p450, predicted response differentially in tamoxifen-treated and nontamoxifen-treated patients. High levels of promoter methylation of the ARHI gene, encoding a RAS-related small G-protein, were strongly predictive of good survival in patients who had not received tamoxifen therapy. Our results reveal an as yet unrecognized degree of interaction between DNA methylation and HR biology in breast cancer cells and suggest potentially clinically useful novel DNA methylation predictors of response to hormonal and non-hormonal breast cancer therapy.

Roughly two-thirds of all breast cancers are ERalpha-positive and can be treated with the antiestrogen, Tamoxifen, however resistance occurs in 33% of women who take the drug for more than 5 y. Aberrant DNA methylation, an epigenetic mechanism that alters gene expression in cancer, is thought to play a role in this resistance. To develop an understanding of Tamoxifen-resistance and identify novel pathways and targets of aberrant methylation, DNA from MCF-7 breast cancer cells and Tamoxifen-resistant derivatives, TMX2-11 and TMX2-28, were analyzed using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Normalizing against MCF-7 values, ERalpha-positive TMX2-11 had 4000 hypermethylated sites and ERalpha-negative TMX2-28 had over 33 000. Analysis of CpG sites altered in both TMX2-11 and TMX2-28 revealed that the Tamoxifen-resistant cell lines share 3000 hypermethylated and 200 hypomethylated CpGs. ZNF350 and MAGED1, two genes hypermethylated in both cell lines, were examined in greater detail. Treatment with 5-aza-2deoxycitidine caused a significant reduction in promoter methylation of both ZNF350 and MAGED1 and a corresponding increase in expression in TMX2-28. A similar relationship between methylation and expression was not detected in TMX2-11. Our findings are indicative of the variable responses to methylation-targeted breast cancer therapy and highlight the need for biomarkers that accurately predict treatment outcome.. Roughly two-thirds of all breast cancers are ERalpha-positive and can be treated with the antiestrogen, Tamoxifen, however resistance occurs in 33% of women who take the drug for more than 5 y. Aberrant DNA methylation, an epigenetic mechanism that alters gene expression in cancer, is thought to play a role in this resistance. To develop an understanding of Tamoxifen-resistance and identify novel pathways and targets of aberrant methylation, DNA from MCF-7 breast cancer cells and Tamoxifen-resistant derivatives, TMX2-11 and TMX2-28, were analyzed using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Normalizing against MCF-7 values, ERalpha-positive TMX2-11 had 4000 hypermethylated sites and ERalpha-negative TMX2-28 had over 33 000. Analysis of CpG sites altered in both TMX2-11 and TMX2-28 revealed that the Tamoxifen-resistant cell lines share 3000 hypermethylated and 200 hypomethylated CpGs. ZNF350 and MAGED1, two genes hypermethylated in both cell lines, were examined in greater detail. Treatment with 5-aza-2deoxycitidine caused a significant reduction in promoter methylation of both ZNF350 and MAGED1 and a corresponding increase in expression in TMX2-28. A similar relationship between methylation and expression was not detected in TMX2-11. Our findings are indicative of the variable responses to methylation-targeted breast cancer therapy and highlight the need for biomarkers that accurately predict treatment outcome.

DNA methylation plays a role in the etiology of primary breast cancers. We analyzed paired primary and second breast tumors to elucidate the role of methylation in recurrence. Methylation profiles from paired primary and second breast tumors of 23 women were assessed using the HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Twelve women had estrogen receptor positive (ERpos) primary and second tumors, five had estrogen receptor negative (ERneg) primary and second tumors, and six had an ERpos primary tumor but an ERneg second tumor. Stratifying tumors by occurrence revealed that the greater methylation previously associated with ERpos tumors, is more pronounced in primary tumors than in second tumors. Further, ERneg second tumors are more methylated than ERpos second tumors among women who had ERpos primary tumors. Pathway analyses using gene lists generated from comparisons of methylation in ERpos primary tumors from the paired sets with ERpos tumors from six women without recurrences, identified differences between groups based on the ER status of the second tumor. Hypermethylated genes of significantly enriched pathways were differentially associated with survival. DNA methylation profiles of ERpos primary breast tumors support the development and use of tumor methylation profiles for stratifying women with breast cancer both for prognosis and therapy.. DNA methylation plays a role in the etiology of primary breast cancers. We analyzed paired primary and second breast tumors to elucidate the role of methylation in recurrence. Methylation profiles from paired primary and second breast tumors of 23 women were assessed using the HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Twelve women had estrogen receptor positive (ERpos) primary and second tumors, five had estrogen receptor negative (ERneg) primary and second tumors, and six had an ERpos primary tumor but an ERneg second tumor. Stratifying tumors by occurrence revealed that the greater methylation previously associated with ERpos tumors, is more pronounced in primary tumors than in second tumors. Further, ERneg second tumors are more methylated than ERpos second tumors among women who had ERpos primary tumors. Pathway analyses using gene lists generated from comparisons of methylation in ERpos primary tumors from the paired sets with ERpos tumors from six women without recurrences, identified differences between groups based on the ER status of the second tumor. Hypermethylated genes of significantly enriched pathways were differentially associated with survival. DNA methylation profiles of ERpos primary breast tumors support the development and use of tumor methylation profiles for stratifying women with breast cancer both for prognosis and therapy.

The biological mechanisms driving associations between alcohol consumption and chronic diseases might include epigenetic modification of DNA methylation. We explored the hypothesis that alcohol consumption is associated with methylation in an epigenome-wide association study of blood and normal breast tissue DNA. Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Illumina Inc., San Diego, California) array data on blood DNA methylation was examined in a discovery set of 2,878 non-Hispanic white women from the Sister Study (United States, 2004-2015) who provided detailed questionnaire information on lifetime alcohol use. Robust linear regression modeling was used to identify significant associations (false discovery rate of Q < 0.05) between the number of alcoholic drinks per week and DNA methylation at 5,458 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites. Associations were replicated (P < 0.05) for 677 CpGs in an independent set of 187 blood DNA samples from the Sister Study and for 628 CpGs in an independent set of 171 normal breast DNA samples; 1,207 CpGs were replicated in either blood or normal breast, with 98 CpGs replicated in both tissues. Individual gene effects were notable for phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PGHDH), peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIF), solute carrier 15 (SLC15), solute carrier family 43 member 1 (SLC43A1), and solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11). We also found that high alcohol consumption was associated with significantly lower global methylation as measured by the average of CpGs on the entire array.. The biological mechanisms driving associations between alcohol consumption and chronic diseases might include epigenetic modification of DNA methylation. We explored the hypothesis that alcohol consumption is associated with methylation in an epigenome-wide association study of blood and normal breast tissue DNA. Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Illumina Inc., San Diego, California) array data on blood DNA methylation was examined in a discovery set of 2,878 non-Hispanic white women from the Sister Study (United States, 2004-2015) who provided detailed questionnaire information on lifetime alcohol use. Robust linear regression modeling was used to identify significant associations (false discovery rate of Q < 0.05) between the number of alcoholic drinks per week and DNA methylation at 5,458 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites. Associations were replicated (P < 0.05) for 677 CpGs in an independent set of 187 blood DNA samples from the Sister Study and for 628 CpGs in an independent set of 171 normal breast DNA samples; 1,207 CpGs were replicated in either blood or normal breast, with 98 CpGs replicated in both tissues. Individual gene effects were notable for phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PGHDH), peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPIF), solute carrier 15 (SLC15), solute carrier family 43 member 1 (SLC43A1), and solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11). We also found that high alcohol consumption was associated with significantly lower global methylation as measured by the average of CpGs on the entire array.

There is no doubt that aberrant somatic (tumor-specific) methylation significantly contributes to the carcinogenic process. However, the question of the relevance of methylation pattern changes, acquired by individuals during their development and lifetime or inherited through the germline, to the pathology of different diseases, remains open. Recently, a number of studies addressed the question of the prevalence of aberrant methylation of cancer-related genes in peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA and indicated a strong possibility that the presence of constitutional methylation of different genes might predispose for cancer development. Here, we have used the methlyation-sensitive high-resolution melting approach to examine the methylation status of the BRCA1, BRCA2, APC, RASSF1A and RARbeta2 genes in PBLs of a group of women diagnosed with breast cancer, and an age-matched control group with no signs of breast cancer. No significant differences in the frequency of methylation of the above genes were found between cases and controls in our study. Hence, testing for the presence of methylation of cancer-related genes in PBL DNA from women diagnosed with sporadic breast cancer and classified for testing without any pathological or clinical selection criteria does not seem to have clinical applicability.. There is no doubt that aberrant somatic (tumor-specific) methylation significantly contributes to the carcinogenic process. However, the question of the relevance of methylation pattern changes, acquired by individuals during their development and lifetime or inherited through the germline, to the pathology of different diseases, remains open. Recently, a number of studies addressed the question of the prevalence of aberrant methylation of cancer-related genes in peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA and indicated a strong possibility that the presence of constitutional methylation of different genes might predispose for cancer development. Here, we have used the methlyation-sensitive high-resolution melting approach to examine the methylation status of the BRCA1, BRCA2, APC, RASSF1A and RARbeta2 genes in PBLs of a group of women diagnosed with breast cancer, and an age-matched control group with no signs of breast cancer. No significant differences in the frequency of methylation of the above genes were found between cases and controls in our study. Hence, testing for the presence of methylation of cancer-related genes in PBL DNA from women diagnosed with sporadic breast cancer and classified for testing without any pathological or clinical selection criteria does not seem to have clinical applicability.

BACKGROUND: Recently it has been suggested that acquisition of methylation of the BRCA1 promoter detectable in peripheral blood (PB) DNA, could give raise to development of breast cancer. In this study, we aimed to investigate a relationship between methylation of three breast cancer related genes in PB DNA, and tumor specific (somatic) methylation of these genes in the same individual. FINDINGS: We have examined methylation status of the BRCA1, APC and RASSF1A promoter regions in a panel of 75 breast tumor and PB DNA samples from the same individual. In our study group, 4.0% of the patients displayed methylation of BRCA1 and APC in both tumor and the corresponding PB DNA. At the same time despite of marked methylation in tumor DNA, no methylation of BRCA1 and APC was seen in PB DNA of 4.3% and 2.7% of the patients respectively. The RASSF1A promoter did not show methylation in PB DNA. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that for at least a subset of cancer patients methylation of certain cancer related genes in PB DNA does not seem to be directly linked to somatic methylation of the same genes in tumor DNA, and therefore may only be specific to PB DNA.. BACKGROUND: Recently it has been suggested that acquisition of methylation of the BRCA1 promoter detectable in peripheral blood (PB) DNA, could give raise to development of breast cancer. In this study, we aimed to investigate a relationship between methylation of three breast cancer related genes in PB DNA, and tumor specific (somatic) methylation of these genes in the same individual. FINDINGS: We have examined methylation status of the BRCA1, APC and RASSF1A promoter regions in a panel of 75 breast tumor and PB DNA samples from the same individual. In our study group, 4.0% of the patients displayed methylation of BRCA1 and APC in both tumor and the corresponding PB DNA. At the same time despite of marked methylation in tumor DNA, no methylation of BRCA1 and APC was seen in PB DNA of 4.3% and 2.7% of the patients respectively. The RASSF1A promoter did not show methylation in PB DNA. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that for at least a subset of cancer patients methylation of certain cancer related genes in PB DNA does not seem to be directly linked to somatic methylation of the same genes in tumor DNA, and therefore may only be specific to PB DNA.

INTRODUCTION: Despite similar clinical and pathological features, large numbers of breast cancer patients experience different outcomes of the disease. This, together with the fact that the incidence of breast cancer is growing worldwide, emphasizes an urgent need for identification of new biomarkers for early cancer detection and stratification of patients. METHODS: We used ultrahigh-resolution microarrays to compare genomewide methylation patterns of breast carcinomas (n = 20) and nonmalignant breast tissue (n = 5). Biomarker properties of a subset of discovered differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were validated using methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) in a case-control study on a panel of breast carcinomas (n = 275) and non-malignant controls (n = 74). RESULTS: On the basis of microarray results, we selected 19 DMRs for large-scale screening of cases and controls. Analysis of the screening results showed that all DMRs tested displayed significant gains of methylation in the cancer tissue compared to the levels in control tissue. Interestingly, we observed two types of locus-specific methylation, with loci undergoing either predominantly full or heterogeneous methylation during carcinogenesis. Almost all tested DMRs (17 of 19) displayed low-level methylation in nonmalignant breast tissue, independently of locus-specific methylation patterns in cases. CONCLUSIONS: Specific loci can undergo either heterogeneous or full methylation during carcinogenesis, and loci hypermethylated in cancer frequently show low-level methylation in nonmalignant tissue.. INTRODUCTION: Despite similar clinical and pathological features, large numbers of breast cancer patients experience different outcomes of the disease. This, together with the fact that the incidence of breast cancer is growing worldwide, emphasizes an urgent need for identification of new biomarkers for early cancer detection and stratification of patients. METHODS: We used ultrahigh-resolution microarrays to compare genomewide methylation patterns of breast carcinomas (n = 20) and nonmalignant breast tissue (n = 5). Biomarker properties of a subset of discovered differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were validated using methylation-sensitive high-resolution melting (MS-HRM) in a case-control study on a panel of breast carcinomas (n = 275) and non-malignant controls (n = 74). RESULTS: On the basis of microarray results, we selected 19 DMRs for large-scale screening of cases and controls. Analysis of the screening results showed that all DMRs tested displayed significant gains of methylation in the cancer tissue compared to the levels in control tissue. Interestingly, we observed two types of locus-specific methylation, with loci undergoing either predominantly full or heterogeneous methylation during carcinogenesis. Almost all tested DMRs (17 of 19) displayed low-level methylation in nonmalignant breast tissue, independently of locus-specific methylation patterns in cases. CONCLUSIONS: Specific loci can undergo either heterogeneous or full methylation during carcinogenesis, and loci hypermethylated in cancer frequently show low-level methylation in nonmalignant tissue.

A pharmacological-based global screen for epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes was performed in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Eighty-one genes in MCF-7 cells and 131 in MDA-MB-231 cells were identified, that had low basal expression and were significantly upregulated following treatment. Eighteen genes were studied for methylation and/or expression in breast cancer; PTCH, the receptor for the hedgehog (Hh) pathway and a known tumor suppressor gene, was selected for further analysis. Methylation of the PTCH promoter was found in MCF-7 cells and in breast cancer samples, and correlated with low PTCH expression. Immunohistochemical analysis of breast tissue arrays revealed high expression of PTCH in normal breast compared to ductal carcinomas in situ (DCIS) and invasive ductal carcinomas; furthermore, association was found between PTCH expression and favorable prognostic factors. PTCH is an inhibitor of the Hh pathway, and its silencing activates the pathway and promotes growth. Indeed, high activity of the Hh pathway was identified in MCF-7 cells and overexpression of PTCH inhibited the pathway. Moreover, treatment with cyclopamine, an inhibitor of the pathway, reduced cell growth and slowed the cell cycle in these cells. Thus, unmasking of epigenetic silencing in breast cancer enabled us to discover a large number of candidate tumor suppressor genes. Further analysis suggested a role of one of these genes, PTCH, in breast cancer tumorigenesis.. A pharmacological-based global screen for epigenetically silenced tumor suppressor genes was performed in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. Eighty-one genes in MCF-7 cells and 131 in MDA-MB-231 cells were identified, that had low basal expression and were significantly upregulated following treatment. Eighteen genes were studied for methylation and/or expression in breast cancer; PTCH, the receptor for the hedgehog (Hh) pathway and a known tumor suppressor gene, was selected for further analysis. Methylation of the PTCH promoter was found in MCF-7 cells and in breast cancer samples, and correlated with low PTCH expression. Immunohistochemical analysis of breast tissue arrays revealed high expression of PTCH in normal breast compared to ductal carcinomas in situ (DCIS) and invasive ductal carcinomas; furthermore, association was found between PTCH expression and favorable prognostic factors. PTCH is an inhibitor of the Hh pathway, and its silencing activates the pathway and promotes growth. Indeed, high activity of the Hh pathway was identified in MCF-7 cells and overexpression of PTCH inhibited the pathway. Moreover, treatment with cyclopamine, an inhibitor of the pathway, reduced cell growth and slowed the cell cycle in these cells. Thus, unmasking of epigenetic silencing in breast cancer enabled us to discover a large number of candidate tumor suppressor genes. Further analysis suggested a role of one of these genes, PTCH, in breast cancer tumorigenesis.

Promoter methylation analysis of genes frequently silenced in breast cancer is a promising indicator of breast cancer risk, as these methylation events are thought to occur long before presentation of disease. The numerous exfoliated epithelial cells present in breast milk may provide the breast epithelial DNA needed for detailed methylation analysis and assessment of breast cancer risk. Fresh breast milk samples and health, lifestyle, and reproductive history questionnaires were collected from 111 women. Pyrosequencing analysis was conducted on DNA isolated from the exfoliated epithelial cells immunomagnetically separated from the total cell population in the breast milk of 102 women. A total of 65 CpG sites were examined in six tumor suppressor genes: PYCARD (also known as ASC or TMS1), CDH1, GSTP1, RBP1 (also known as CRBP1), SFRP1, and RASSF1. A sufficient quantity of DNA was obtained for meaningful analysis of promoter methylation; women donated an average of 86 ml of milk with a mean yield of 32,700 epithelial cells per ml. Methylation scores were in general low as expected of benign tissue, but analysis of outlier methylation scores revealed a significant relationship between breast cancer risk, as indicated by previous biopsy, and methylation score for several CpG sites in CDH1, GSTP1, SFRP1, and RBP1. Methylation of RASSF1 was positively correlated with women's age irrespective of her reproductive history. Promoter methylation patterns in DNA from breast milk epithelial cells can likely be used to assess breast cancer risk. Additional studies of women at high breast cancer risk are warranted.. Promoter methylation analysis of genes frequently silenced in breast cancer is a promising indicator of breast cancer risk, as these methylation events are thought to occur long before presentation of disease. The numerous exfoliated epithelial cells present in breast milk may provide the breast epithelial DNA needed for detailed methylation analysis and assessment of breast cancer risk. Fresh breast milk samples and health, lifestyle, and reproductive history questionnaires were collected from 111 women. Pyrosequencing analysis was conducted on DNA isolated from the exfoliated epithelial cells immunomagnetically separated from the total cell population in the breast milk of 102 women. A total of 65 CpG sites were examined in six tumor suppressor genes: PYCARD (also known as ASC or TMS1), CDH1, GSTP1, RBP1 (also known as CRBP1), SFRP1, and RASSF1. A sufficient quantity of DNA was obtained for meaningful analysis of promoter methylation; women donated an average of 86 ml of milk with a mean yield of 32,700 epithelial cells per ml. Methylation scores were in general low as expected of benign tissue, but analysis of outlier methylation scores revealed a significant relationship between breast cancer risk, as indicated by previous biopsy, and methylation score for several CpG sites in CDH1, GSTP1, SFRP1, and RBP1. Methylation of RASSF1 was positively correlated with women's age irrespective of her reproductive history. Promoter methylation patterns in DNA from breast milk epithelial cells can likely be used to assess breast cancer risk. Additional studies of women at high breast cancer risk are warranted.

Women carrying germline mutations in BRCA1 are at a substantially elevated risk of breast cancer and their tumors typically have distinctive morphologic features. We hypothesized that constitutional methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region could give rise to such breast cancers in women. We selected 255 women diagnosed with breast cancer before the age of 40 years for whom BRCA1 germline mutations had not been identified. Of them, 52 had five or more of nine BRCA1 mutation-associated morphologic features (group 1), 39 had four (group 2), and 164 had three or less (group 3). The prevalence of detectable BRCA1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood DNA decreased from 31% to 10% to 5% across groups 1-3, respectively (P = 0.000002), and was significantly greater than the 4% frequency in unaffected controls (P = 0.004). Peripheral blood methylation was associated with a 3.5-fold (95% CI, 1.4-10.5) increased risk of having early onset breast cancer. Methylation was consistently mosaic in the peripheral blood where the estimated allelic frequency of BRCA1 promoter methylation ranged from 0.1% to 17%. Group 1 women, but not group 3 women, with detectable methylation of peripheral blood DNA had high levels of BRCA1 promoter methylation of their tumor DNA, indicating that constitutional BRCA1 methylation strongly predisposes toward the development of BRCA1 methylated tumors that then have features resembling BRCA1 mutated tumors. Screening peripheral blood for BRCA1 promoter methylation might thus predict early-onset breast cancers. This raises the possibility of chemoprevention or other intervention to diminish the risk of developing breast cancer in these women.. Women carrying germline mutations in BRCA1 are at a substantially elevated risk of breast cancer and their tumors typically have distinctive morphologic features. We hypothesized that constitutional methylation of the BRCA1 promoter region could give rise to such breast cancers in women. We selected 255 women diagnosed with breast cancer before the age of 40 years for whom BRCA1 germline mutations had not been identified. Of them, 52 had five or more of nine BRCA1 mutation-associated morphologic features (group 1), 39 had four (group 2), and 164 had three or less (group 3). The prevalence of detectable BRCA1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood DNA decreased from 31% to 10% to 5% across groups 1-3, respectively (P = 0.000002), and was significantly greater than the 4% frequency in unaffected controls (P = 0.004). Peripheral blood methylation was associated with a 3.5-fold (95% CI, 1.4-10.5) increased risk of having early onset breast cancer. Methylation was consistently mosaic in the peripheral blood where the estimated allelic frequency of BRCA1 promoter methylation ranged from 0.1% to 17%. Group 1 women, but not group 3 women, with detectable methylation of peripheral blood DNA had high levels of BRCA1 promoter methylation of their tumor DNA, indicating that constitutional BRCA1 methylation strongly predisposes toward the development of BRCA1 methylated tumors that then have features resembling BRCA1 mutated tumors. Screening peripheral blood for BRCA1 promoter methylation might thus predict early-onset breast cancers. This raises the possibility of chemoprevention or other intervention to diminish the risk of developing breast cancer in these women.

The p16 (CDKN2/MTS-1/INK4A) gene is one of several tumour-suppressor genes that have been shown to be inactivated by DNA methylation in various human cancers including breast tumours. We have used bisulphite genomic sequencing to examine the detailed sequence specificity of DNA methylation in the CpG island promoter/exon 1 region in the p16 gene in DNA from a series of human breast cancer specimens and normal human breast tissue (from reductive mammaplasty). The p16 region examined was unmethylated in the four normal human breast specimens and in four out of nine breast tumours. In the other five independent breast tumour specimens, a uniform pattern of DNA methylation was observed. Of the nine major sites of DNA methylation in the amplified region from these tumour DNAs, four were in non-CG sequences. This unusual concentration of non-CG methylation sites was not a general phenomenon present throughout the genome of these tumour cells because the methylated CpG island regions of interspersed L1 repeats had a pattern of (almost exclusively) CG methylation similar to that found in normal breast tissue DNA and in DNA from tumours with unmethylated p16 genes. These data suggest that DNA methylation of the p16 gene in some breast tumours could be the result of an active process that generates a discrete methylation pattern and, hence, could ultimately be amenable to therapeutic manipulation.. The p16 (CDKN2/MTS-1/INK4A) gene is one of several tumour-suppressor genes that have been shown to be inactivated by DNA methylation in various human cancers including breast tumours. We have used bisulphite genomic sequencing to examine the detailed sequence specificity of DNA methylation in the CpG island promoter/exon 1 region in the p16 gene in DNA from a series of human breast cancer specimens and normal human breast tissue (from reductive mammaplasty). The p16 region examined was unmethylated in the four normal human breast specimens and in four out of nine breast tumours. In the other five independent breast tumour specimens, a uniform pattern of DNA methylation was observed. Of the nine major sites of DNA methylation in the amplified region from these tumour DNAs, four were in non-CG sequences. This unusual concentration of non-CG methylation sites was not a general phenomenon present throughout the genome of these tumour cells because the methylated CpG island regions of interspersed L1 repeats had a pattern of (almost exclusively) CG methylation similar to that found in normal breast tissue DNA and in DNA from tumours with unmethylated p16 genes. These data suggest that DNA methylation of the p16 gene in some breast tumours could be the result of an active process that generates a discrete methylation pattern and, hence, could ultimately be amenable to therapeutic manipulation.

The molecular basis of methotrexate resistance was studied in human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which are inherently defective in methotrexate uptake and lack expression of the reduced folate carrier (RFC). Transfection of MDA-MB-231 cells with RFC cDNA restored methotrexate uptake and increased methotrexate sensitivity by approximately 50-fold. A CpG island in the promoter region of RFC was found to be methylated in MDA-MB-231 cells, but was unmethylated in RFC expressing, methotrexate-sensitive MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies against acetylated histones H3 and H4 showed that the RFC promoter was enriched for acetylated histones on expressed, unmethylated alleles only. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored RFC expression but also led to increased methotrexate efflux and did not reverse methotrexate resistance. This suggests that 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine up-regulates both methotrexate uptake and some methotrexate-resistance mechanism(s). Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis showed increased expression levels of several ATP-dependent efflux pumps in response to 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, including P-glycoprotein and members of the multidrug resistance-associated protein family. Up-regulation of P-glycoprotein in response to 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine was associated with demethylation of a CpG island in the MDR1 promoter, whereas the mechanism(s) for 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-induced up-regulation of multidrug resistance-associated proteins is probably indirect. Dipyridamole inhibited methotrexate efflux and reversed methotrexate resistance in 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-treated MDA-MB-231 cells.. The molecular basis of methotrexate resistance was studied in human MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, which are inherently defective in methotrexate uptake and lack expression of the reduced folate carrier (RFC). Transfection of MDA-MB-231 cells with RFC cDNA restored methotrexate uptake and increased methotrexate sensitivity by approximately 50-fold. A CpG island in the promoter region of RFC was found to be methylated in MDA-MB-231 cells, but was unmethylated in RFC expressing, methotrexate-sensitive MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies against acetylated histones H3 and H4 showed that the RFC promoter was enriched for acetylated histones on expressed, unmethylated alleles only. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored RFC expression but also led to increased methotrexate efflux and did not reverse methotrexate resistance. This suggests that 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine up-regulates both methotrexate uptake and some methotrexate-resistance mechanism(s). Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis showed increased expression levels of several ATP-dependent efflux pumps in response to 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, including P-glycoprotein and members of the multidrug resistance-associated protein family. Up-regulation of P-glycoprotein in response to 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine was associated with demethylation of a CpG island in the MDR1 promoter, whereas the mechanism(s) for 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-induced up-regulation of multidrug resistance-associated proteins is probably indirect. Dipyridamole inhibited methotrexate efflux and reversed methotrexate resistance in 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-treated MDA-MB-231 cells.

Global decreases in DNA methylation, particularly in repetitive elements, have been associated with genomic instability and human cancer. Emerging, though limited, data suggest that in white blood cell (WBC) DNA levels of methylation, overall or in repetitive elements, may be associated with cancer risk. We measured methylation levels of three repetitive elements [Satellite 2 (Sat2)], long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE-1) and Alu) by MethyLight, and LINE-1 by pyrosequencing in a total of 282 breast cancer cases and 347 unaffected sisters from the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry (BCFR) using DNA from both granulocytes and total WBC. We found that methylation levels in all markers were correlated between sisters (Spearman correlation coefficients ranged from 0.17 to 0.55). Sat2 methylation was statistically significantly associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratio (OR) = 2.09, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.09-4.03; for each unit decrease in the natural log of the methylation level, OR = 2.12, 95% CI = 0.88-5.11 for the lowest quartile compared with the highest quartile]. These associations were only observed in total WBC but not granulocyte DNA. There was no association between breast cancer and LINE-1 and Alu methylation. If replicated in larger prospective studies, these findings support that selected markers of epigenetic changes measured in WBC, such as Sat2, may be potential biomarkers of breast cancer risk.. Global decreases in DNA methylation, particularly in repetitive elements, have been associated with genomic instability and human cancer. Emerging, though limited, data suggest that in white blood cell (WBC) DNA levels of methylation, overall or in repetitive elements, may be associated with cancer risk. We measured methylation levels of three repetitive elements [Satellite 2 (Sat2)], long interspersed nuclear element-1 (LINE-1) and Alu) by MethyLight, and LINE-1 by pyrosequencing in a total of 282 breast cancer cases and 347 unaffected sisters from the New York site of the Breast Cancer Family Registry (BCFR) using DNA from both granulocytes and total WBC. We found that methylation levels in all markers were correlated between sisters (Spearman correlation coefficients ranged from 0.17 to 0.55). Sat2 methylation was statistically significantly associated with increased breast cancer risk [odds ratio (OR) = 2.09, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.09-4.03; for each unit decrease in the natural log of the methylation level, OR = 2.12, 95% CI = 0.88-5.11 for the lowest quartile compared with the highest quartile]. These associations were only observed in total WBC but not granulocyte DNA. There was no association between breast cancer and LINE-1 and Alu methylation. If replicated in larger prospective studies, these findings support that selected markers of epigenetic changes measured in WBC, such as Sat2, may be potential biomarkers of breast cancer risk.

Family history, a well-established risk factor for breast cancer, can have both genetic and environmental contributions. Shared environment in families as well as epigenetic changes that also may be influenced by shared genetics and environment may also explain familial clustering of cancers. Epigenetic regulation, such as DNA methylation, can change the activity of a DNA segment without a change in the sequence; environmental exposures experienced across the life course can induce such changes. However, genetic-epigenetic interactions, detected as methylation quantitative trait loci (mQTLs; a.k.a. meQTLs) and haplotype-dependent allele-specific methylation (hap-ASM), can also contribute to inter-individual differences in DNA methylation patterns. To identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated with breast cancer susceptibility, we examined differences in white blood cell DNA methylation in 29 candidate genes in 426 girls (ages 6-13 years) from the LEGACY Girls Study, 239 with and 187 without a breast cancer family history (BCFH). We measured methylation by targeted massively parallel bisulfite sequencing (bis-seq) and observed BCFH DMRs in two genes: ESR1 (Delta4.9%, P = 0.003) and SEC16B (Delta3.6%, P = 0.026), each of which has been previously implicated in breast cancer susceptibility and pubertal development. These DMRs showed high inter-individual variability in methylation, suggesting the presence of mQTLs/hap-ASM. Using single nucleotide polymorphisms data in the bis-seq amplicon, we found strong hap-ASM in SEC16B (with allele specific-differences ranging from 42% to 74%). These findings suggest that differential methylation in genes relevant to breast cancer susceptibility may be present early in life, and that inherited genetic factors underlie some of these epigenetic differences.. Family history, a well-established risk factor for breast cancer, can have both genetic and environmental contributions. Shared environment in families as well as epigenetic changes that also may be influenced by shared genetics and environment may also explain familial clustering of cancers. Epigenetic regulation, such as DNA methylation, can change the activity of a DNA segment without a change in the sequence; environmental exposures experienced across the life course can induce such changes. However, genetic-epigenetic interactions, detected as methylation quantitative trait loci (mQTLs; a.k.a. meQTLs) and haplotype-dependent allele-specific methylation (hap-ASM), can also contribute to inter-individual differences in DNA methylation patterns. To identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated with breast cancer susceptibility, we examined differences in white blood cell DNA methylation in 29 candidate genes in 426 girls (ages 6-13 years) from the LEGACY Girls Study, 239 with and 187 without a breast cancer family history (BCFH). We measured methylation by targeted massively parallel bisulfite sequencing (bis-seq) and observed BCFH DMRs in two genes: ESR1 (Delta4.9%, P = 0.003) and SEC16B (Delta3.6%, P = 0.026), each of which has been previously implicated in breast cancer susceptibility and pubertal development. These DMRs showed high inter-individual variability in methylation, suggesting the presence of mQTLs/hap-ASM. Using single nucleotide polymorphisms data in the bis-seq amplicon, we found strong hap-ASM in SEC16B (with allele specific-differences ranging from 42% to 74%). These findings suggest that differential methylation in genes relevant to breast cancer susceptibility may be present early in life, and that inherited genetic factors underlie some of these epigenetic differences.

Lower levels of global DNA methylation in white blood cell (WBC) DNA have been associated with adult cancers. It is unknown whether individuals with a family history of cancer also have lower levels of global DNA methylation early in life. We examined global DNA methylation in WBC (measured in three repetitive elements, LINE1, Sat2 and Alu, by MethyLight and in LINE1 by pyrosequencing) in 51 girls ages 6-17. Compared to girls without a family history of breast cancer, methylation levels were lower for all assays in girls with a family history of breast cancer, and statistically significantly lower for Alu and LINE1 pyrosequencing. After adjusting for age, body mass index (BMI), and Tanner stage, only methylation in Alu was associated with family history of breast cancer. If these findings are replicated in larger studies, they suggest that lower levels of global WBC DNA methylation observed later in life in adults with cancer may also be present early in life in children with a family history of cancer.. Lower levels of global DNA methylation in white blood cell (WBC) DNA have been associated with adult cancers. It is unknown whether individuals with a family history of cancer also have lower levels of global DNA methylation early in life. We examined global DNA methylation in WBC (measured in three repetitive elements, LINE1, Sat2 and Alu, by MethyLight and in LINE1 by pyrosequencing) in 51 girls ages 6-17. Compared to girls without a family history of breast cancer, methylation levels were lower for all assays in girls with a family history of breast cancer, and statistically significantly lower for Alu and LINE1 pyrosequencing. After adjusting for age, body mass index (BMI), and Tanner stage, only methylation in Alu was associated with family history of breast cancer. If these findings are replicated in larger studies, they suggest that lower levels of global WBC DNA methylation observed later in life in adults with cancer may also be present early in life in children with a family history of cancer.

To examine DNA methylation profiles in breast tumors of women with a strong breast cancer family history, we measured methylation by bisulfite sequencing in 40 genes in 40 breast tumor tissues from women in the Breast Cancer Family Registry. We selected candidate genes from analysis of the Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA) breast data. Compared to TCGA breast cancer, BCFR cases are younger and more likely to be ER-negative. Overall, we found that many of the methylation differences between BCFR tumor and normal adjacent tissues were smaller than that in TCGA samples. We found only 32% of tested genes were hypermethylated in BCFR; the largest difference was 36.1% for SEPW1, and the smallest difference was 10% for RYR2. These data suggest the importance of examining breast cancer cases including familial cases enriched with early-onset cancers to identify methylation markers that can be examined in blood as biomarkers for early detection.. To examine DNA methylation profiles in breast tumors of women with a strong breast cancer family history, we measured methylation by bisulfite sequencing in 40 genes in 40 breast tumor tissues from women in the Breast Cancer Family Registry. We selected candidate genes from analysis of the Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA) breast data. Compared to TCGA breast cancer, BCFR cases are younger and more likely to be ER-negative. Overall, we found that many of the methylation differences between BCFR tumor and normal adjacent tissues were smaller than that in TCGA samples. We found only 32% of tested genes were hypermethylated in BCFR; the largest difference was 36.1% for SEPW1, and the smallest difference was 10% for RYR2. These data suggest the importance of examining breast cancer cases including familial cases enriched with early-onset cancers to identify methylation markers that can be examined in blood as biomarkers for early detection.

PURPOSE: A comprehensive comparison of biomarker expression between patients' primary breast carcinoma (PBC) and their metastatic breast carcinomas (MBC) has not been done. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We did rapid autopsies (postmortem intervals, 1-4 hours) on 10 consenting patients who died of MBC. We constructed single-patient tissue microarrays from the patients' archived PBC and multiple different MBCs harvested at autopsy, which were immunohistochemically labeled for multiple biomarkers. Methylation of multiple gene promoters was assessed quantitatively on dissected PBC and MBC samples. RESULTS: Extensive heterogeneity was observed between PBC and their paired MBC, as well as among multiple MBC from the same patient. Estrogen and progesterone receptors tended to be uniformly down-regulated in metastases. E-cadherin was down-regulated in a subset of the MBC of one case. Variable overexpression in MBC compared with the PBC was observed for cyclooxygenase-2 (five cases), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; four cases), MET (four cases), and mesothelin (four cases). No case strongly overexpressed HER-2/neu by immunohistochemistry, but eight cases showed variable protein expression ranging from negative to equivocal (2+) in different MBC. In one case, variable low-level HER-2/neu gene amplification was found. EGFR and MET overexpression were restricted to the four basal-type cancers. EGFR protein overexpression did not correlate with EGFR gene amplification. Multigene promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1a, HIN1, cyclin D2, Twist, estrogen receptor alpha, APC1, and RARbeta was overall very similar in the PBC and all MBCs in all cases. CONCLUSIONS: Therapeutic targets identified in the PBC or even some MBC may not reflect targets present in all metastatic sites.. PURPOSE: A comprehensive comparison of biomarker expression between patients' primary breast carcinoma (PBC) and their metastatic breast carcinomas (MBC) has not been done. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We did rapid autopsies (postmortem intervals, 1-4 hours) on 10 consenting patients who died of MBC. We constructed single-patient tissue microarrays from the patients' archived PBC and multiple different MBCs harvested at autopsy, which were immunohistochemically labeled for multiple biomarkers. Methylation of multiple gene promoters was assessed quantitatively on dissected PBC and MBC samples. RESULTS: Extensive heterogeneity was observed between PBC and their paired MBC, as well as among multiple MBC from the same patient. Estrogen and progesterone receptors tended to be uniformly down-regulated in metastases. E-cadherin was down-regulated in a subset of the MBC of one case. Variable overexpression in MBC compared with the PBC was observed for cyclooxygenase-2 (five cases), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; four cases), MET (four cases), and mesothelin (four cases). No case strongly overexpressed HER-2/neu by immunohistochemistry, but eight cases showed variable protein expression ranging from negative to equivocal (2+) in different MBC. In one case, variable low-level HER-2/neu gene amplification was found. EGFR and MET overexpression were restricted to the four basal-type cancers. EGFR protein overexpression did not correlate with EGFR gene amplification. Multigene promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1a, HIN1, cyclin D2, Twist, estrogen receptor alpha, APC1, and RARbeta was overall very similar in the PBC and all MBCs in all cases. CONCLUSIONS: Therapeutic targets identified in the PBC or even some MBC may not reflect targets present in all metastatic sites.

The clinical relevance of aberrant DNA methylation is being increasingly recognized in breast cancer. The present study aimed to evaluate the promoter methylation status of seven candidate genes and to explore their potential use as a biomarker for the diagnosis of breast cancer. A total of 70 Chinese patients with breast cancer were recruited, and matched with 20 patients with benign breast disease (BBD). Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to measure the methylation status of selected genes. The protein expression of candidate genes was determined by immunohistochemistry. Hypermethylation of Breast cancer 1, early onset; DNA repair associated (BRCA1), glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1), cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A, O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, phosphatase and tensin homolog, retinoic acid receptor beta 2 and cyclin D2 was observed to be more common in cancerous tissues (24.3, 31.4, 40.0, 27.1, 48.6, 55.7 and 67.1%, respectively) as compared with BBD controls (0.0, 0.0, 20.0, 25.0, 40.0, 40.0 and 45.0%, respectively). Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated a correlation between the methylation of the target gene and downregulation of protein expression. When BRCA1 and GSTP1 were combined as the biomarker, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve reached 0.721 (95% confidence interval, 0.616-0.827). The present findings indicated that promoter methylation of cancer-related genes was frequently observed in patients with breast cancer and was associated with various clinical features. Hypermethylation of BRCA1 and GSTP1 may be used as promising biomarkers for breast cancer.. The clinical relevance of aberrant DNA methylation is being increasingly recognized in breast cancer. The present study aimed to evaluate the promoter methylation status of seven candidate genes and to explore their potential use as a biomarker for the diagnosis of breast cancer. A total of 70 Chinese patients with breast cancer were recruited, and matched with 20 patients with benign breast disease (BBD). Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to measure the methylation status of selected genes. The protein expression of candidate genes was determined by immunohistochemistry. Hypermethylation of Breast cancer 1, early onset; DNA repair associated (BRCA1), glutathione S-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1), cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A, O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase, phosphatase and tensin homolog, retinoic acid receptor beta 2 and cyclin D2 was observed to be more common in cancerous tissues (24.3, 31.4, 40.0, 27.1, 48.6, 55.7 and 67.1%, respectively) as compared with BBD controls (0.0, 0.0, 20.0, 25.0, 40.0, 40.0 and 45.0%, respectively). Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated a correlation between the methylation of the target gene and downregulation of protein expression. When BRCA1 and GSTP1 were combined as the biomarker, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve reached 0.721 (95% confidence interval, 0.616-0.827). The present findings indicated that promoter methylation of cancer-related genes was frequently observed in patients with breast cancer and was associated with various clinical features. Hypermethylation of BRCA1 and GSTP1 may be used as promising biomarkers for breast cancer.

The inactivation of BRCA1 by epigenetic alterations is a critical event in breast tumorigenesis, which may potentially be used as a prognostic marker for patients with breast cancer. The present study systematically reviewed the promoter methylation of BRCA1 and its relationship to the clinical outcomes of breast cancer patients. We performed a meta-analysis following the PRISMA guideline. Relevant articles were identified by searching PubMed, Web of Science and Embase database until August 2013. The pooled hazard ratio (HR) and 95 % confidence interval (CI) were applied to estimate the effect of BRCA1 methylation. Random or fixed effect model was chosen based on the heterogeneity analysis. A total of 3,205 patients from nine eligible studies were included in the meta-analysis. BRCA1 methylation was found to be significantly correlated with a poor overall survival of breast cancer, with the combined HR (95 % CI) of 2.02 (1.35-3.03). After adjusting for potential confounders using the Cox regression model, the pooled HR (95 % CI) of BRCA1 methylation on patients' overall survival was 1.38 (1.04-1.84). If we used the disease-free survival as the outcome, the combined HR (95 % CI) was 2.89 (1.73-4.83) for univariate analysis and 3.92 (95 % CI 1.49-10.32) for multivariate analysis, respectively. Subgroup analysis of specimen types revealed that the pooled HR (95 % CI) for overall survival was 1.48 (1.22-1.81) when using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimen and 1.38 (0.16-11.84) when using fresh frozen tissues. As for the disease-free survival, the pooled HR (95 % CI) was 2.47 (1.33-4.58) when using FFPE specimen and 2.78 (1.47-5.28) when using fresh frozen tissues. As a conclusion, the present meta-analysis provides evidence that BRCA1 methylation is associated with a poor survival of breast cancer patients. Our findings underscore the clinical relevance of aberrant epigenetic alteration as a promising biomarker for the prognosis of human cancers.. The inactivation of BRCA1 by epigenetic alterations is a critical event in breast tumorigenesis, which may potentially be used as a prognostic marker for patients with breast cancer. The present study systematically reviewed the promoter methylation of BRCA1 and its relationship to the clinical outcomes of breast cancer patients. We performed a meta-analysis following the PRISMA guideline. Relevant articles were identified by searching PubMed, Web of Science and Embase database until August 2013. The pooled hazard ratio (HR) and 95 % confidence interval (CI) were applied to estimate the effect of BRCA1 methylation. Random or fixed effect model was chosen based on the heterogeneity analysis. A total of 3,205 patients from nine eligible studies were included in the meta-analysis. BRCA1 methylation was found to be significantly correlated with a poor overall survival of breast cancer, with the combined HR (95 % CI) of 2.02 (1.35-3.03). After adjusting for potential confounders using the Cox regression model, the pooled HR (95 % CI) of BRCA1 methylation on patients' overall survival was 1.38 (1.04-1.84). If we used the disease-free survival as the outcome, the combined HR (95 % CI) was 2.89 (1.73-4.83) for univariate analysis and 3.92 (95 % CI 1.49-10.32) for multivariate analysis, respectively. Subgroup analysis of specimen types revealed that the pooled HR (95 % CI) for overall survival was 1.48 (1.22-1.81) when using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) specimen and 1.38 (0.16-11.84) when using fresh frozen tissues. As for the disease-free survival, the pooled HR (95 % CI) was 2.47 (1.33-4.58) when using FFPE specimen and 2.78 (1.47-5.28) when using fresh frozen tissues. As a conclusion, the present meta-analysis provides evidence that BRCA1 methylation is associated with a poor survival of breast cancer patients. Our findings underscore the clinical relevance of aberrant epigenetic alteration as a promising biomarker for the prognosis of human cancers.

The crucial interplay between metabolic remodeling and the epigenetics could contribute to promote cancer progression. A remarkable association within interaction, LKB1 has been reported, suggesting that the expression of key enzymes involving de novo serine synthesis and DNA methyltransferases like DNMT1 and DNMT3A increase LKB1-deficiency cells. However, the complex interactional link between metabolic remodeling and the epigenetics is still unclear. Hence, we focus on the relationship between YAP/TAZ and serine metabolism to control methylation of DNA or histone in breast cancer with LKB1 deficiency. We hypothesize that YAP/TAZ may have the function to activate key enzymes involving serine metabolism like PSPH and up-regulate the amino acid transporters to supply sources of serine synthesis through activation of C-MYC with TEAD1. Further, we speculate that YAP/TAZ in dependent of FOS may promote DNMT1 and subsequently mediate DNMT1-G9A complex involving serine metabolism and the methylation of DNA and histone. We hope that our study will stimulate further studies and a new targeted therapy and early medical intervention for YAP/TAZ could be a useful option for breast cancer cases complicated with LKB1 deficiency.. The crucial interplay between metabolic remodeling and the epigenetics could contribute to promote cancer progression. A remarkable association within interaction, LKB1 has been reported, suggesting that the expression of key enzymes involving de novo serine synthesis and DNA methyltransferases like DNMT1 and DNMT3A increase LKB1-deficiency cells. However, the complex interactional link between metabolic remodeling and the epigenetics is still unclear. Hence, we focus on the relationship between YAP/TAZ and serine metabolism to control methylation of DNA or histone in breast cancer with LKB1 deficiency. We hypothesize that YAP/TAZ may have the function to activate key enzymes involving serine metabolism like PSPH and up-regulate the amino acid transporters to supply sources of serine synthesis through activation of C-MYC with TEAD1. Further, we speculate that YAP/TAZ in dependent of FOS may promote DNMT1 and subsequently mediate DNMT1-G9A complex involving serine metabolism and the methylation of DNA and histone. We hope that our study will stimulate further studies and a new targeted therapy and early medical intervention for YAP/TAZ could be a useful option for breast cancer cases complicated with LKB1 deficiency.

Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) acts as a 'gate-keeper' to prevent DNA damage during estrogen metabolism. Both experimental and epidemiological studies suggest the role of COMT in pathogenesis of human breast cancer (BCa). It was previously reported that inhibition of COMT enzyme activity in estradiol-treated human breast epithelial carcinoma-derived MCF-7 cells caused increased oxidative DNA damage and formation of mutagenic depurinating adducts. To improve our understanding of factors influencing estrogen metabolism in BCa, it requires a mechanistic study illustrating the regulation of this 'gate-keeper'. We investigated the epigenetic mechanisms underlying decreased COMT transcription in MCF-7 cells exposed to 17ss-estradiol (E2) and the phytoestrogen, genistein (GEN). CpG site-specific methylation at promoters for both soluble (S) and membrane-bound (MB) COMT transcripts were assessed. Both E2 and GEN induced CpG site-specific methylation within the distal promoter of MB-COMT. In addition, ChIP analysis showed that there was increased binding of DNMT3B, MBD2 and HDAC1 within this promoter. These epigenetic changes were associated with decreased COMT transcript levels. Interestingly, sulforaphane, an antioxidant commonly found in cruciferous vegetables, was able to reverse the estrogen-induced epigenetic changes and gene silencing of COMT. Our data provide a new insight in epigenetically targeting COMT transcription. Since reactive estrogen metabolites may contribute to breast cancer, our findings may help in developing prevention and/or intervention strategies for human BCa.. Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) acts as a 'gate-keeper' to prevent DNA damage during estrogen metabolism. Both experimental and epidemiological studies suggest the role of COMT in pathogenesis of human breast cancer (BCa). It was previously reported that inhibition of COMT enzyme activity in estradiol-treated human breast epithelial carcinoma-derived MCF-7 cells caused increased oxidative DNA damage and formation of mutagenic depurinating adducts. To improve our understanding of factors influencing estrogen metabolism in BCa, it requires a mechanistic study illustrating the regulation of this 'gate-keeper'. We investigated the epigenetic mechanisms underlying decreased COMT transcription in MCF-7 cells exposed to 17ss-estradiol (E2) and the phytoestrogen, genistein (GEN). CpG site-specific methylation at promoters for both soluble (S) and membrane-bound (MB) COMT transcripts were assessed. Both E2 and GEN induced CpG site-specific methylation within the distal promoter of MB-COMT. In addition, ChIP analysis showed that there was increased binding of DNMT3B, MBD2 and HDAC1 within this promoter. These epigenetic changes were associated with decreased COMT transcript levels. Interestingly, sulforaphane, an antioxidant commonly found in cruciferous vegetables, was able to reverse the estrogen-induced epigenetic changes and gene silencing of COMT. Our data provide a new insight in epigenetically targeting COMT transcription. Since reactive estrogen metabolites may contribute to breast cancer, our findings may help in developing prevention and/or intervention strategies for human BCa.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic changes associated with promoter DNA methylation results in silencing of several tumor suppressor genes that lead to increased risk for tumor formation and for progression of the cancer. METHODS: Methylation specific PCR (MSP) and bisulfite sequencing were used for determination of proapoptotic gene Caspase 8 (CASP8) and the tumor suppressor gene maspin promoter methylation in four breast cancer and two non-tumorigenic breast cell lines. Involvement of histone H3 methylation in those cell lines were examined by CHIP assay. RESULTS: The CpG sites in the promoter region of CASP8 and maspin were methylated in all four breast cancer cell lines but not in two non-tumorigenic breast cell lines. Demethylation agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dc) selectively inhibits DNA methyltransferases, DNMT3a and DNMT3b, and restored CASP8 and maspin gene expression in breast cancer cells. 5-aza-dc also reduced histone H3k9me2 occupancy on CASP8 promoter in SKBR3cells, but not in MCF-7 cells. Combination of histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-aza-dc significant decrease in nuclear expression of Di-methyl histone H3-Lys27 and slight increase in acetyl histone H3-Lys9 in MCF-7 cells. CASP8 mRNA and protein level in MCF-7 cells were increased by the 5-aza-dc in combination with TSA. Data from our study also demonstrated that treatment with 5-FU caused a significant increase in unmethylated CASP8 and in CASP8 mRNA in all 3 cancer lines. CONCLUSIONS: CASP8 and maspin expression were reduced in breast cancer cells due to promoter methylation. Selective application of demethylating agents could offer novel therapeutic opportunities in breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Epigenetic changes associated with promoter DNA methylation results in silencing of several tumor suppressor genes that lead to increased risk for tumor formation and for progression of the cancer. METHODS: Methylation specific PCR (MSP) and bisulfite sequencing were used for determination of proapoptotic gene Caspase 8 (CASP8) and the tumor suppressor gene maspin promoter methylation in four breast cancer and two non-tumorigenic breast cell lines. Involvement of histone H3 methylation in those cell lines were examined by CHIP assay. RESULTS: The CpG sites in the promoter region of CASP8 and maspin were methylated in all four breast cancer cell lines but not in two non-tumorigenic breast cell lines. Demethylation agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dc) selectively inhibits DNA methyltransferases, DNMT3a and DNMT3b, and restored CASP8 and maspin gene expression in breast cancer cells. 5-aza-dc also reduced histone H3k9me2 occupancy on CASP8 promoter in SKBR3cells, but not in MCF-7 cells. Combination of histone deacetylase inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA) and 5-aza-dc significant decrease in nuclear expression of Di-methyl histone H3-Lys27 and slight increase in acetyl histone H3-Lys9 in MCF-7 cells. CASP8 mRNA and protein level in MCF-7 cells were increased by the 5-aza-dc in combination with TSA. Data from our study also demonstrated that treatment with 5-FU caused a significant increase in unmethylated CASP8 and in CASP8 mRNA in all 3 cancer lines. CONCLUSIONS: CASP8 and maspin expression were reduced in breast cancer cells due to promoter methylation. Selective application of demethylating agents could offer novel therapeutic opportunities in breast cancer.

PURPOSE: Physical activity, a protective factor for breast cancer, increases the level of DNA methylation. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2), a confirmed breast cancer susceptibility gene, is predisposed to be methylated. Therefore, DNA methylation related genes, such as methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), methionine synthase (MTR), and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT), together with physical activity and FGFR2, may interact with each other to effect breast cancer risk. METHODS: A total of 839 incident breast cancer cases and 863 age-matched controls from Guangzhou, China were included in this study. We used questionnaires to assess physical activity in metabolic equivalent (MET)-h/week/year and a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry platform to ascertain genotypes. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated from logistic regression models. RESULTS: Exercise activity and FGFR2 rs2981582 were confirmed to be associated with breast cancer risk, and were found to significantly interact (P for multiplicative and additive interactions = 0.045 and 0.021, respectively). Women who had CT/TT genotypes of FGFR2 rs2981582 and experienced exercise activity <3 MET-h/week/year had significantly increased risk (OR = 3.15, 95% CI = 2.28-4.35) compared to women with CC genotype and >/= 3 MET-h/week/year. There was also a significant interaction between FGFR2 rs2981582 and MTHFR rs1801133 on breast cancer risk (P for multiplicative and additive interactions = 0.039 and 0.023, respectively). CONCLUSION: We found both a gene-environment (FGFR2-exercise activity) and a gene-gene (FGFR2-MTHFR) interaction on breast cancer risk. Our results suggest that environmental factors, such as physical activity, may be able to counteract genetic susceptibility to breast cancer.. PURPOSE: Physical activity, a protective factor for breast cancer, increases the level of DNA methylation. Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2), a confirmed breast cancer susceptibility gene, is predisposed to be methylated. Therefore, DNA methylation related genes, such as methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), methionine synthase (MTR), and DNA methyltransferase (DNMT), together with physical activity and FGFR2, may interact with each other to effect breast cancer risk. METHODS: A total of 839 incident breast cancer cases and 863 age-matched controls from Guangzhou, China were included in this study. We used questionnaires to assess physical activity in metabolic equivalent (MET)-h/week/year and a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry platform to ascertain genotypes. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated from logistic regression models. RESULTS: Exercise activity and FGFR2 rs2981582 were confirmed to be associated with breast cancer risk, and were found to significantly interact (P for multiplicative and additive interactions = 0.045 and 0.021, respectively). Women who had CT/TT genotypes of FGFR2 rs2981582 and experienced exercise activity <3 MET-h/week/year had significantly increased risk (OR = 3.15, 95% CI = 2.28-4.35) compared to women with CC genotype and >/= 3 MET-h/week/year. There was also a significant interaction between FGFR2 rs2981582 and MTHFR rs1801133 on breast cancer risk (P for multiplicative and additive interactions = 0.039 and 0.023, respectively). CONCLUSION: We found both a gene-environment (FGFR2-exercise activity) and a gene-gene (FGFR2-MTHFR) interaction on breast cancer risk. Our results suggest that environmental factors, such as physical activity, may be able to counteract genetic susceptibility to breast cancer.

Objective: To investigate the effect of methylation status of breast cancer metastasis suppressor gene 1 (BRMS1) on the expression of breast cancer and the biological behavior of cancer cells in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Methods: The expression of BRMS1 in TNBC tissues and corresponding non-malignant tissues and its relationship with clinicopathological parameters were detected by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA and protein expression of BRMS1 in normal breast epithelial cells and TNBC cells were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting. The methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) was used to detect the methylation status of BRMS1 in each cell. These cells were treated with demethylated preparations (5-Aza-dC) to re-activate BRMS1 expression. Using tumor cell invasion assay to detect influence of BRMS1 demethylation on the invasion capacity of cancer cells. The data were statistically analyzed. Results: The positive expression rate of BRMS1 protein in TNBC tissues was significantly lower than that in corresponding non-malignant tissues (chi(2)= 6.635, P<0.05). The mRNA expression level of BRMS1 in patients with lymph node metastasis was significantly lower than those with no lymph node metastasis (P=0.018). The down-regulation of BRMS1 expression was related to the methylation of DNA promoter, which was statistically significant (chi(2)=14.68, P<0.05). The mRNA and protein expression of BRMS1 was also correlated with tumor size and TNM staging (P=0.000-0.003). After using 5-Aza-dC, the number of cells with invasive capacity was significantly lower than those of the control group (t=3.262-10.72, P<0.05). Conclusions: The decrease of BRMS1 expression in TNBC cells is related to the methylation of DNA. Demethylation can inhibit the invasion of breast cancer cells.. Objective: To investigate the effect of methylation status of breast cancer metastasis suppressor gene 1 (BRMS1) on the expression of breast cancer and the biological behavior of cancer cells in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Methods: The expression of BRMS1 in TNBC tissues and corresponding non-malignant tissues and its relationship with clinicopathological parameters were detected by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA and protein expression of BRMS1 in normal breast epithelial cells and TNBC cells were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting. The methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) was used to detect the methylation status of BRMS1 in each cell. These cells were treated with demethylated preparations (5-Aza-dC) to re-activate BRMS1 expression. Using tumor cell invasion assay to detect influence of BRMS1 demethylation on the invasion capacity of cancer cells. The data were statistically analyzed. Results: The positive expression rate of BRMS1 protein in TNBC tissues was significantly lower than that in corresponding non-malignant tissues (chi(2)= 6.635, P<0.05). The mRNA expression level of BRMS1 in patients with lymph node metastasis was significantly lower than those with no lymph node metastasis (P=0.018). The down-regulation of BRMS1 expression was related to the methylation of DNA promoter, which was statistically significant (chi(2)=14.68, P<0.05). The mRNA and protein expression of BRMS1 was also correlated with tumor size and TNM staging (P=0.000-0.003). After using 5-Aza-dC, the number of cells with invasive capacity was significantly lower than those of the control group (t=3.262-10.72, P<0.05). Conclusions: The decrease of BRMS1 expression in TNBC cells is related to the methylation of DNA. Demethylation can inhibit the invasion of breast cancer cells.

Wnt signaling plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis. DAPPER2 (DACT2) functions as an inhibitor of canonical Wnt signaling and plays distinct roles in different cell contexts, with its role in breast tumorigenesis unclear. We investigated DACT2 expression in breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors, as well as its functions and molecular mechanisms. Results showed that DACT2 expression was silenced in 9/9 of cell lines. Promoter CpG methylation of DACT2 was detected in 89% (8/9) of cell lines, as well as in 73% (107/147) of primary tumors, but only in 20% (1/5) of surgical margin tissues and in none of normal breast tissues. Demethylation of BT549 and T47D cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored DACT2 expression along with promoter demethylation, suggesting that its downregulation in breast cancer is dependent on promoter methylation. Furthermore, ectopic expression of DACT2 induced breast cell apoptosis in vitro, and further inhibited breast tumor cell proliferation, migration and EMT, through antagonizing Wnt/beta-catenin and Akt/GSK-3 signaling. Thus, these results demonstrate that DACT2 functions as a tumor suppressor for breast cancer but was frequently disrupted epigenetically in this cancer.. Wnt signaling plays an important role in breast carcinogenesis. DAPPER2 (DACT2) functions as an inhibitor of canonical Wnt signaling and plays distinct roles in different cell contexts, with its role in breast tumorigenesis unclear. We investigated DACT2 expression in breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors, as well as its functions and molecular mechanisms. Results showed that DACT2 expression was silenced in 9/9 of cell lines. Promoter CpG methylation of DACT2 was detected in 89% (8/9) of cell lines, as well as in 73% (107/147) of primary tumors, but only in 20% (1/5) of surgical margin tissues and in none of normal breast tissues. Demethylation of BT549 and T47D cell lines with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored DACT2 expression along with promoter demethylation, suggesting that its downregulation in breast cancer is dependent on promoter methylation. Furthermore, ectopic expression of DACT2 induced breast cell apoptosis in vitro, and further inhibited breast tumor cell proliferation, migration and EMT, through antagonizing Wnt/beta-catenin and Akt/GSK-3 signaling. Thus, these results demonstrate that DACT2 functions as a tumor suppressor for breast cancer but was frequently disrupted epigenetically in this cancer.

Breast cancer is a complex disease driven by multiple factors including both genetic and epigenetic alterations. Recent studies revealed that abnormal gene expression induced by epigenetic changes, including aberrant promoter methylation and histone modification, plays a critical role in human breast carcinogenesis. Silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by promoter CpG methylation facilitates cells growth and survival advantages and further results in tumor initiation and progression, thus directly contributing to breast tumorigenesis. Usually, aberrant promoter methylation of TSGs, which can be reversed by pharmacological reagents, occurs at the early stage of tumorigenesis and therefore may serve as a potential tumor marker for early diagnosis and therapeutic targeting of breast cancer. In this review, we summarize the epigenetic changes of multiple TSGs involved in breast pathogenesis and their potential clinical applications as tumor markers for early detection and treatment of breast cancer.. Breast cancer is a complex disease driven by multiple factors including both genetic and epigenetic alterations. Recent studies revealed that abnormal gene expression induced by epigenetic changes, including aberrant promoter methylation and histone modification, plays a critical role in human breast carcinogenesis. Silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by promoter CpG methylation facilitates cells growth and survival advantages and further results in tumor initiation and progression, thus directly contributing to breast tumorigenesis. Usually, aberrant promoter methylation of TSGs, which can be reversed by pharmacological reagents, occurs at the early stage of tumorigenesis and therefore may serve as a potential tumor marker for early diagnosis and therapeutic targeting of breast cancer. In this review, we summarize the epigenetic changes of multiple TSGs involved in breast pathogenesis and their potential clinical applications as tumor markers for early detection and treatment of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Robust and precise molecular prognostic predictors for luminal breast cancer are required. This study aimed to identify key methylation sites in luminal breast cancer, as well as precise molecular tools for predicting prognosis. METHODS: We compared methylation levels of normal and luminal breast cancer samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset. The relationships among differentially methylated sites, corresponding mRNA expression levels and prognosis were further analysed. Differentially expressed genes in normal and cancerous samples were analysed, followed by the identification of prognostic signature genes. Samples were divided into low- and high-risk groups based on the signature genes. Prognoses of low- and high-risk groups were compared. The Gene Expression Omnibus dataset were used to validate signature genes for prognosis prediction. Prognosis of low- and high-risk groups in Luminal A and Luminal B samples from the TCGA and the Metabric cohort dataset were analyzed. We also analysed the correlation between clinical features of low- and high- risk groups as well as their differences in gene expression. RESULTS: Fourteen methylation sites were considered to be related to luminal breast cancer prognosis because their methylation levels, mRNA expression and prognoses were closely related to each other. The methylation level of SOSTDC1 was used to divide samples into hypo- and hyper-methylation groups. We also identified an mRNA signature, comprising eight transcripts, ESCO2, PACSIN1, CDCA2, PIGR, PTN, RGMA, KLK4 and CENPA, which was used to divide samples into low- and high-risk groups. The low-risk group showed significantly better prognosis than the high-risk group. A correlation analysis revealed that the risk score was an independent prognostic factor. Low- and high- risk groups significantly correlated with the survival ratio in Luminal A samples, but not in Luminal B samples on the basis of the TCGA and the Metabric cohort dataset. Further functional annotation demonstrated that the differentially expressed genes were mainly involved in cell cycle and cancer progression. CONCLUSIONS: We identified several key methylation sites and an mRNA signature for predicting luminal breast cancer prognosis. The signature exhibited effective and precise prediction of prognosis and may serve as a prognostic and diagnostic marker for luminal breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Robust and precise molecular prognostic predictors for luminal breast cancer are required. This study aimed to identify key methylation sites in luminal breast cancer, as well as precise molecular tools for predicting prognosis. METHODS: We compared methylation levels of normal and luminal breast cancer samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset. The relationships among differentially methylated sites, corresponding mRNA expression levels and prognosis were further analysed. Differentially expressed genes in normal and cancerous samples were analysed, followed by the identification of prognostic signature genes. Samples were divided into low- and high-risk groups based on the signature genes. Prognoses of low- and high-risk groups were compared. The Gene Expression Omnibus dataset were used to validate signature genes for prognosis prediction. Prognosis of low- and high-risk groups in Luminal A and Luminal B samples from the TCGA and the Metabric cohort dataset were analyzed. We also analysed the correlation between clinical features of low- and high- risk groups as well as their differences in gene expression. RESULTS: Fourteen methylation sites were considered to be related to luminal breast cancer prognosis because their methylation levels, mRNA expression and prognoses were closely related to each other. The methylation level of SOSTDC1 was used to divide samples into hypo- and hyper-methylation groups. We also identified an mRNA signature, comprising eight transcripts, ESCO2, PACSIN1, CDCA2, PIGR, PTN, RGMA, KLK4 and CENPA, which was used to divide samples into low- and high-risk groups. The low-risk group showed significantly better prognosis than the high-risk group. A correlation analysis revealed that the risk score was an independent prognostic factor. Low- and high- risk groups significantly correlated with the survival ratio in Luminal A samples, but not in Luminal B samples on the basis of the TCGA and the Metabric cohort dataset. Further functional annotation demonstrated that the differentially expressed genes were mainly involved in cell cycle and cancer progression. CONCLUSIONS: We identified several key methylation sites and an mRNA signature for predicting luminal breast cancer prognosis. The signature exhibited effective and precise prediction of prognosis and may serve as a prognostic and diagnostic marker for luminal breast cancer.

Kruppel-associated box-containing zinc finger proteins (KRAP-ZFPs) are well recognized as key regulators of transcription, which play a crucial role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and tumorigenesis. We previously identified a KRAP-ZFP protein ZNF545 acting as a tumor suppressor involved in tumor pathogenesis. However, its expression and biological function in breast cancer remain elusive. In this study, we found that ZNF545 was frequently downregulated in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), progesterone receptor-positive (PR+) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) breast tumor tissues compared with paired adjacent non-tumor tissues. We further examined its expression and methylation in breast cancer cell lines by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and methylation-specific PCR. We found that ZNF545 was silenced by promoter methylation in MCF7 cell line, and its expression could be restored by demethylation, concomitant with increased unmethylated alleles. ZNF545 methylation was detected in 29% of breast tumor tissues, but not in normal breast tissues, suggesting tumor-specific methylation of ZNF545 in breast cancer. Ectopic expression of ZNF545 in MCF7 cells inhibited cell proliferation through inducing cell cycle G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis, thus as a tumor suppressor. Moreover, ZNF545 upregulated mRNA and protein levels of c-Jun/AP1, BAX, p53 and Caspase 3. Taken together, these results demonstrate that ZNF545 inhibits breast tumor cell proliferation through inducing apoptosis and is disrupted by promoter methylation in breast cancer.. Kruppel-associated box-containing zinc finger proteins (KRAP-ZFPs) are well recognized as key regulators of transcription, which play a crucial role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and tumorigenesis. We previously identified a KRAP-ZFP protein ZNF545 acting as a tumor suppressor involved in tumor pathogenesis. However, its expression and biological function in breast cancer remain elusive. In this study, we found that ZNF545 was frequently downregulated in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), progesterone receptor-positive (PR+) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2-) breast tumor tissues compared with paired adjacent non-tumor tissues. We further examined its expression and methylation in breast cancer cell lines by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and methylation-specific PCR. We found that ZNF545 was silenced by promoter methylation in MCF7 cell line, and its expression could be restored by demethylation, concomitant with increased unmethylated alleles. ZNF545 methylation was detected in 29% of breast tumor tissues, but not in normal breast tissues, suggesting tumor-specific methylation of ZNF545 in breast cancer. Ectopic expression of ZNF545 in MCF7 cells inhibited cell proliferation through inducing cell cycle G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis, thus as a tumor suppressor. Moreover, ZNF545 upregulated mRNA and protein levels of c-Jun/AP1, BAX, p53 and Caspase 3. Taken together, these results demonstrate that ZNF545 inhibits breast tumor cell proliferation through inducing apoptosis and is disrupted by promoter methylation in breast cancer.

It has been previously demonstrated that genistein exhibits anticancer activity against breast cancer. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the anticancer effect of genistein, in particular the epigenetic basis, remain unclear. In this study, we investigated whether genistein could modulate the DNA methylation status and expression of cancer-related genes in breast cancer cells. We treated MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells with genistein in vitro. We found that genistein decreased the levels of global DNA methylation, DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity and expression of DNMT1. Yet, the expression of DNMT3A and DNMT3B showed no significant change. Using molecular modeling, we observed that genistein might directly interact with the catalytic domain of DNMT1, thus competitively inhibiting the binding of hemimethylated DNA to the catalytic domain of DNMT1. Furthermore, genistein decreased DNA methylation in the promoter region of multiple tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) such as ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), mammary serpin peptidase inhibitor (SERPINB5), and increased the mRNA expression of these genes. However, we detected no significant changes in the DNA methylation status or mRNA expression of stratifin (SFN). These results suggest that the anticancer effect of genistein on breast cancer may be partly due to its ability to demethylate and reactivate methylation-silenced TSGs through direct interaction with the DNMT1 catalytic domain and inhibition of DNMT1 expression.. It has been previously demonstrated that genistein exhibits anticancer activity against breast cancer. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the anticancer effect of genistein, in particular the epigenetic basis, remain unclear. In this study, we investigated whether genistein could modulate the DNA methylation status and expression of cancer-related genes in breast cancer cells. We treated MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells with genistein in vitro. We found that genistein decreased the levels of global DNA methylation, DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity and expression of DNMT1. Yet, the expression of DNMT3A and DNMT3B showed no significant change. Using molecular modeling, we observed that genistein might directly interact with the catalytic domain of DNMT1, thus competitively inhibiting the binding of hemimethylated DNA to the catalytic domain of DNMT1. Furthermore, genistein decreased DNA methylation in the promoter region of multiple tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) such as ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), mammary serpin peptidase inhibitor (SERPINB5), and increased the mRNA expression of these genes. However, we detected no significant changes in the DNA methylation status or mRNA expression of stratifin (SFN). These results suggest that the anticancer effect of genistein on breast cancer may be partly due to its ability to demethylate and reactivate methylation-silenced TSGs through direct interaction with the DNMT1 catalytic domain and inhibition of DNMT1 expression.

Carcinoma of the breast is a leading hormone-dependent malignancy, resulting in a high rate of morbidity and mortality. During the complex multi-step process of tumor promotion, this common cancer is initiated as hormone-responsive (HR), non-metastatic cancer, followed by a gradual transition into a highly metastatic hormone-insensitive (HI) variety which lacks the functional estrogen receptor. This transition of cancer cells causes them to become refractory to hormonal treatment. Urokinase (uPA), a member of the serine protease family has been implicated in the progression of several malignancies including breast cancer. In the current study, we have examined the correlation between hormone sensitivity and uPA expression in HR normal mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) and in MCF-7 and T-47D breast cancer cell lines. Comparison was made with HI breast cancer cells MDA-231. uPA mRNA expression was seen only in the highly invasive, HI breast cancer cells MDA-231. Lack of uPA expression in HR normal (HMEC) and in minimally invasive, HR cells (MCF-7 and T-47D) was due to transcriptional suppression of uPA gene expression as determined by nuclear run-off assays. Since alteration of the DNA methylation status of CpG island in the 5' sequence of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes has been demonstrated to change their expression, we examined DNA methylation as a potential molecular mechanism for regulating uPA gene transcription in these cancer cells. Southern blot analysis using methylation sensitive enzymes revealed that CpG island of uPA gene are methylated in HR, HMEC, MCF-7 and T-47D cells, whereas they are hypomethylated in HI and MDA-231 cells. Treatment of HR MCF-7 cells with cytosine DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5' azacytidine caused a dose-dependent induction of uPA mRNA due to demethylation of the CpG island of the uPA gene which led to increased invasive ability of these HR cancer cells. Our results demonstrate that DNA methylation can regulate the transcription of the uPA gene to alter the invasive behaviour of these HR breast cancer cells.. Carcinoma of the breast is a leading hormone-dependent malignancy, resulting in a high rate of morbidity and mortality. During the complex multi-step process of tumor promotion, this common cancer is initiated as hormone-responsive (HR), non-metastatic cancer, followed by a gradual transition into a highly metastatic hormone-insensitive (HI) variety which lacks the functional estrogen receptor. This transition of cancer cells causes them to become refractory to hormonal treatment. Urokinase (uPA), a member of the serine protease family has been implicated in the progression of several malignancies including breast cancer. In the current study, we have examined the correlation between hormone sensitivity and uPA expression in HR normal mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) and in MCF-7 and T-47D breast cancer cell lines. Comparison was made with HI breast cancer cells MDA-231. uPA mRNA expression was seen only in the highly invasive, HI breast cancer cells MDA-231. Lack of uPA expression in HR normal (HMEC) and in minimally invasive, HR cells (MCF-7 and T-47D) was due to transcriptional suppression of uPA gene expression as determined by nuclear run-off assays. Since alteration of the DNA methylation status of CpG island in the 5' sequence of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes has been demonstrated to change their expression, we examined DNA methylation as a potential molecular mechanism for regulating uPA gene transcription in these cancer cells. Southern blot analysis using methylation sensitive enzymes revealed that CpG island of uPA gene are methylated in HR, HMEC, MCF-7 and T-47D cells, whereas they are hypomethylated in HI and MDA-231 cells. Treatment of HR MCF-7 cells with cytosine DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5' azacytidine caused a dose-dependent induction of uPA mRNA due to demethylation of the CpG island of the uPA gene which led to increased invasive ability of these HR cancer cells. Our results demonstrate that DNA methylation can regulate the transcription of the uPA gene to alter the invasive behaviour of these HR breast cancer cells.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant promoter CpG island hypermethylation is associated with transcriptional silencing. Tumor suppressor genes are the key targets of hypermethylation in breast cancer and therefore may lead to malignancy by deregulation of cell growth and division. Our previous pilot study with pairs of malignant and normal breast tissues identified correlated methylation of two pairs of genes - HIN-1/RASSFIA and RIL/CDH13 - with expression of estrogen receptors (ER), progesterone receptors (PR), and HER2 (HER2). To determine the impact of methylation on clinical outcome, we have conducted a larger study with breast cancers for which time to first recurrence and overall survival are known. METHODS: Tumors from 193 patients with early stage breast cancer who received no adjuvant systemic therapy were used to analyze methylation levels of RIL, HIN-1, RASSF1A and CDH13 genes for associations with known predictive and prognostic factors and for impact on time to first recurrence and overall survival. RESULTS: In this study, we found that ER was associated with RASSF1A methylation (p < 0.001) and HIN-1 methylation (p = 0.002). PR was associated with RIL methylation (p = 0.012), HIN-1 (p = 0.002), and RASSF1A methylation (p = 0.019). Tumor size was associated with RIL and CDH13 methylation (both p = 0.002), and S-phase was associated with RIL methylation (p = 0.036). Only RASSF1A was associated with worse time to first recurrence (p = 0.045) and worse overall survival (p = 0.016) after adjusting for age, tumor size, S-phase, estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of HIN-1, RASSF1A, RIL and CDH13 in breast cancers was associated with clinical characteristics, but only RASSF1A methylation was associated with time to first recurrence and overall survival. Our data suggest that RASSF1A methylation could be a potential prognostic biomarker.. BACKGROUND: Aberrant promoter CpG island hypermethylation is associated with transcriptional silencing. Tumor suppressor genes are the key targets of hypermethylation in breast cancer and therefore may lead to malignancy by deregulation of cell growth and division. Our previous pilot study with pairs of malignant and normal breast tissues identified correlated methylation of two pairs of genes - HIN-1/RASSFIA and RIL/CDH13 - with expression of estrogen receptors (ER), progesterone receptors (PR), and HER2 (HER2). To determine the impact of methylation on clinical outcome, we have conducted a larger study with breast cancers for which time to first recurrence and overall survival are known. METHODS: Tumors from 193 patients with early stage breast cancer who received no adjuvant systemic therapy were used to analyze methylation levels of RIL, HIN-1, RASSF1A and CDH13 genes for associations with known predictive and prognostic factors and for impact on time to first recurrence and overall survival. RESULTS: In this study, we found that ER was associated with RASSF1A methylation (p < 0.001) and HIN-1 methylation (p = 0.002). PR was associated with RIL methylation (p = 0.012), HIN-1 (p = 0.002), and RASSF1A methylation (p = 0.019). Tumor size was associated with RIL and CDH13 methylation (both p = 0.002), and S-phase was associated with RIL methylation (p = 0.036). Only RASSF1A was associated with worse time to first recurrence (p = 0.045) and worse overall survival (p = 0.016) after adjusting for age, tumor size, S-phase, estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor. CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of HIN-1, RASSF1A, RIL and CDH13 in breast cancers was associated with clinical characteristics, but only RASSF1A methylation was associated with time to first recurrence and overall survival. Our data suggest that RASSF1A methylation could be a potential prognostic biomarker.

A number of previous studies have indicated the presence of a link between estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) methylation and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). However, the association between ERalpha methylation and drug resistance during the treatment of TNBC remains unclear. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was used to investigate the methylation of ERalpha in the genomic DNA of 35 patients with TNBC who were defined as cisplatin-based chemotherapy-resistant using chemosensitivity testing. Survival probabilities by covariates were assessed using Kaplan-Meier estimator survival analysis and Cox's proportional hazards models, adjusting for age, menopausal status, tumor size, lymph node metastasis and ERalpha promoter DNA methylation. Of the 35 patients with TNBC analyzed, 8 exhibited ERalpha promoter DNA methylation. Cisplatin resistance was confirmed to be overwhelmingly associated with ERalpha methylation by univariate and multivariate analysis. Even in a limited analysis in patients with ERalpha methylation, the results generated from methylated tumor tissue and unmethylated tumor tissue revealed that expression of breast cancer type 1/2 susceptibility proteins was increased in ERalpha-methylated breast tumor tissue compared with in unmethylated tissue. The ERalpha methylation group tended to have significantly shorter progression-free (P=0.010) and overall (P=0.023) survival times compared with those in the unmethylated group. Similarly, shorter progression-free (P=0.024) and overall (P=0.018) survival times were observed in the cisplatin-resistant group compared with the cisplatin-non-resistant group. ERalpha methylation predicts a poor clinical outcome for patients with TNBC. The results of the present study indicated that ERalpha methylation may be a candidate surrogate biomarker for outcome prediction and cisplatin resistance in TNBC. Further investigation is required to identify potential biomarkers in a larger cohort in a prospective study.. A number of previous studies have indicated the presence of a link between estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) methylation and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). However, the association between ERalpha methylation and drug resistance during the treatment of TNBC remains unclear. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was used to investigate the methylation of ERalpha in the genomic DNA of 35 patients with TNBC who were defined as cisplatin-based chemotherapy-resistant using chemosensitivity testing. Survival probabilities by covariates were assessed using Kaplan-Meier estimator survival analysis and Cox's proportional hazards models, adjusting for age, menopausal status, tumor size, lymph node metastasis and ERalpha promoter DNA methylation. Of the 35 patients with TNBC analyzed, 8 exhibited ERalpha promoter DNA methylation. Cisplatin resistance was confirmed to be overwhelmingly associated with ERalpha methylation by univariate and multivariate analysis. Even in a limited analysis in patients with ERalpha methylation, the results generated from methylated tumor tissue and unmethylated tumor tissue revealed that expression of breast cancer type 1/2 susceptibility proteins was increased in ERalpha-methylated breast tumor tissue compared with in unmethylated tissue. The ERalpha methylation group tended to have significantly shorter progression-free (P=0.010) and overall (P=0.023) survival times compared with those in the unmethylated group. Similarly, shorter progression-free (P=0.024) and overall (P=0.018) survival times were observed in the cisplatin-resistant group compared with the cisplatin-non-resistant group. ERalpha methylation predicts a poor clinical outcome for patients with TNBC. The results of the present study indicated that ERalpha methylation may be a candidate surrogate biomarker for outcome prediction and cisplatin resistance in TNBC. Further investigation is required to identify potential biomarkers in a larger cohort in a prospective study.

Our purpose was to identify epigenetic markers of breast cancer risk, which can be reliably measured in peripheral blood and are amenable for large population screening. We used 2 independent assays, luminometric methylation assay (LUMA) and long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1) to measure "global methylation content" in peripheral blood DNA from a well-characterized population-based case-control study. We examined associations between methylation levels and breast cancer risk among 1055 cases and 1101 controls and potential influences of 1-carbon metabolism on global methylation. Compared with women in the lowest quintile of LUMA methylation, those in the highest quintile had a 2.41-fold increased risk of breast cancer (95% confidence interval: 1.83-3.16; P, trend<0.0001). The association did not vary by other key tumor characteristics and lifestyle risk factors. Consistent with LUMA findings, genome-wide methylation profiling of a subset of samples revealed greater promoter hypermethylation in breast cancer case participants (P=0.04); higher LUMA was associated with higher promoter methylation in the controls (P=0.05). LUMA levels were also associated with functional sodium nitroprusside in key 1-carbon metabolizing genes, MTHFR C677T (P=0.001) and MTRR A66G (P=0.018). LINE-1 methylation was associated with neither breast cancer risk nor 1-carbon metabolism. Our results show that global promoter hypermethylation measured in peripheral blood was associated with breast cancer risk.. Our purpose was to identify epigenetic markers of breast cancer risk, which can be reliably measured in peripheral blood and are amenable for large population screening. We used 2 independent assays, luminometric methylation assay (LUMA) and long interspersed elements-1 (LINE-1) to measure "global methylation content" in peripheral blood DNA from a well-characterized population-based case-control study. We examined associations between methylation levels and breast cancer risk among 1055 cases and 1101 controls and potential influences of 1-carbon metabolism on global methylation. Compared with women in the lowest quintile of LUMA methylation, those in the highest quintile had a 2.41-fold increased risk of breast cancer (95% confidence interval: 1.83-3.16; P, trend<0.0001). The association did not vary by other key tumor characteristics and lifestyle risk factors. Consistent with LUMA findings, genome-wide methylation profiling of a subset of samples revealed greater promoter hypermethylation in breast cancer case participants (P=0.04); higher LUMA was associated with higher promoter methylation in the controls (P=0.05). LUMA levels were also associated with functional sodium nitroprusside in key 1-carbon metabolizing genes, MTHFR C677T (P=0.001) and MTRR A66G (P=0.018). LINE-1 methylation was associated with neither breast cancer risk nor 1-carbon metabolism. Our results show that global promoter hypermethylation measured in peripheral blood was associated with breast cancer risk.

Abnormal methylation in gene promoters is a hallmark of the cancer genome; however, factors that may influence promoter methylation have not been well elucidated. As the one-carbon metabolism pathway provides the universal methyl donor for methylation reactions, perturbation of this pathway might influence DNA methylation and, ultimately, affect gene functions. Utilizing approximately 800 breast cancer tumor tissues from a large population-based study, we investigated the relationships between dietary and genetic factors involved in the one-carbon metabolism pathway and promoter methylation of a panel of 13 breast cancer-related genes. We found that CCND2, HIN1 and CHD1 were the most "dietary sensitive" genes, as methylation of their promoters was associated with intakes of at least two out of the eight dietary methyl factors examined. On the other hand, some micronutrients (i.e., B 2 and B 6) were more "epigenetically active" as their intake levels correlated with promoter methylation status in 3 out of the 13 breast cancer genes evaluated. Both positive (hypermethylation) and inverse (hypomethylation) associations with high micronutrient intake were observed. Unlike what we saw for dietary factors, we did not observe any clear patterns between one-carbon genetic polymorphisms and the promoter methylation status of the genes examined. Our results provide preliminary evidence that one-carbon metabolism may have the capacity to influence the breast cancer epigenome. Given that epigenetic alterations are thought to occur early in cancer development and are potentially reversible, dietary modifications may offer promising venues for cancer intervention and prevention.. Abnormal methylation in gene promoters is a hallmark of the cancer genome; however, factors that may influence promoter methylation have not been well elucidated. As the one-carbon metabolism pathway provides the universal methyl donor for methylation reactions, perturbation of this pathway might influence DNA methylation and, ultimately, affect gene functions. Utilizing approximately 800 breast cancer tumor tissues from a large population-based study, we investigated the relationships between dietary and genetic factors involved in the one-carbon metabolism pathway and promoter methylation of a panel of 13 breast cancer-related genes. We found that CCND2, HIN1 and CHD1 were the most "dietary sensitive" genes, as methylation of their promoters was associated with intakes of at least two out of the eight dietary methyl factors examined. On the other hand, some micronutrients (i.e., B 2 and B 6) were more "epigenetically active" as their intake levels correlated with promoter methylation status in 3 out of the 13 breast cancer genes evaluated. Both positive (hypermethylation) and inverse (hypomethylation) associations with high micronutrient intake were observed. Unlike what we saw for dietary factors, we did not observe any clear patterns between one-carbon genetic polymorphisms and the promoter methylation status of the genes examined. Our results provide preliminary evidence that one-carbon metabolism may have the capacity to influence the breast cancer epigenome. Given that epigenetic alterations are thought to occur early in cancer development and are potentially reversible, dietary modifications may offer promising venues for cancer intervention and prevention.

Promoter-CpG island hypermethylation has been proposed as an alternative mechanism to inactivate BRCA1 in the breast where somatic mutations of BRCA1 are rare. To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between BRCA1 promoter methylation status and prognostic factors as well as survival among women with breast cancer. Promoter methylation of BRCA1 was assessed in 851 archived tumor tissues collected from a population-based study of women diagnosed with invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997, and who were followed for vital status through the end of 2002. About 59% of the tumors were methylated at the promoter of BRCA1. The BRCA1 promoter methylation was more frequent in invasive cancers (P = 0.02) and among premenopausal cases (P = 0.05). BRCA1 promoter methylation was associated with increased risk of breast cancer-specific mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.71; 95% CI: 1.05-2.78) and all-cause mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.49; 95% CI: 1.02-2.18). Neither dietary methyl intakes in the year prior to the baseline interview nor the functional polymorphisms in one-carbon metabolism were associated with BRCA1 methylation status. Our study is the first epidemiological investigation on the prognostic value of BRCA1 promoter methylation in a large population-based cohort of breast cancer patients. Our results indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation is an important factor to consider in predicting breast cancer survival.. Promoter-CpG island hypermethylation has been proposed as an alternative mechanism to inactivate BRCA1 in the breast where somatic mutations of BRCA1 are rare. To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between BRCA1 promoter methylation status and prognostic factors as well as survival among women with breast cancer. Promoter methylation of BRCA1 was assessed in 851 archived tumor tissues collected from a population-based study of women diagnosed with invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997, and who were followed for vital status through the end of 2002. About 59% of the tumors were methylated at the promoter of BRCA1. The BRCA1 promoter methylation was more frequent in invasive cancers (P = 0.02) and among premenopausal cases (P = 0.05). BRCA1 promoter methylation was associated with increased risk of breast cancer-specific mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.71; 95% CI: 1.05-2.78) and all-cause mortality (age-adjusted HR 1.49; 95% CI: 1.02-2.18). Neither dietary methyl intakes in the year prior to the baseline interview nor the functional polymorphisms in one-carbon metabolism were associated with BRCA1 methylation status. Our study is the first epidemiological investigation on the prognostic value of BRCA1 promoter methylation in a large population-based cohort of breast cancer patients. Our results indicate that BRCA1 promoter methylation is an important factor to consider in predicting breast cancer survival.

To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between promoter methylation status of three breast cancer-related genes (BRCA1, APC, and p16) and survival in a large cohort of women with breast cancer. About 800 archived tumor tissues were collected from women diagnosed with a first primary invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997. The vital status of the participants was followed through the end of year 2005 with a mean follow-up time of 8.0 years. Promoter methylation was assessed by methylation-specific PCR (for BRCA1) and MethyLight (for APC and p16). The association of promoter methylation and breast cancer mortality was evaluated by Cox-proportional hazards models. Methylated promoters were found in 59.0, 48.4, and 3.6% of the tumor samples for BRCA1, APC, and p16, respectively. Breast cancer-specific mortality was strongly associated with promoter methylation of p16 [HR and 95% CI: 3.53 (1.83-6.78)], whereas the associations with of BRCA1 and APC were less pronounced [HR and 95% CI: 1.81 (1.18-2.78) and 1.46 (0.98-2.17), respectively]. Similar associations were observed with all-cause mortality. As the number of methylated genes increased, the risk of breast cancer-specific mortality also increased in a dose-dependent manner (P, trend = 0.01). Importantly, even with our results stratified by hormone receptor status, promoter methylation of the three genes remained predictive of mortality. Our results suggest that promoter methylation could be promising epigenetic markers to be considered for breast cancer survival.. To better understand breast cancer etiology and progression, we explored the association between promoter methylation status of three breast cancer-related genes (BRCA1, APC, and p16) and survival in a large cohort of women with breast cancer. About 800 archived tumor tissues were collected from women diagnosed with a first primary invasive or in situ breast cancer in 1996-1997. The vital status of the participants was followed through the end of year 2005 with a mean follow-up time of 8.0 years. Promoter methylation was assessed by methylation-specific PCR (for BRCA1) and MethyLight (for APC and p16). The association of promoter methylation and breast cancer mortality was evaluated by Cox-proportional hazards models. Methylated promoters were found in 59.0, 48.4, and 3.6% of the tumor samples for BRCA1, APC, and p16, respectively. Breast cancer-specific mortality was strongly associated with promoter methylation of p16 [HR and 95% CI: 3.53 (1.83-6.78)], whereas the associations with of BRCA1 and APC were less pronounced [HR and 95% CI: 1.81 (1.18-2.78) and 1.46 (0.98-2.17), respectively]. Similar associations were observed with all-cause mortality. As the number of methylated genes increased, the risk of breast cancer-specific mortality also increased in a dose-dependent manner (P, trend = 0.01). Importantly, even with our results stratified by hormone receptor status, promoter methylation of the three genes remained predictive of mortality. Our results suggest that promoter methylation could be promising epigenetic markers to be considered for breast cancer survival.

Breast cancer remains the most prevalent cancer among women worldwide. The expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) is an important marker for prognosis. ER-alpha status may be positive or negative in breast cancer cells, although the cause of negative or positive status is not yet fully characterized. In the present study, the expression of ER-alpha and miRNA-148a was assessed in two breast cancer cell lines, HCC1937 and MCF7. An association between ER-alpha and miRNA-148a expression was identified. It was then demonstrated that DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) is a target of miRNA-148a, which may suppress the expression of ER-alpha via DNA methylation. Finally, an miRNA-148a mimic or inhibitor was transfected into MCF7 cells; the miRNA-148a mimic increased ER-alpha expression whereas the miRNA-148a inhibitor decreased ER-alpha expression. In conclusion, it was identified that miRNA-148a regulates ER-alpha expression through DNMT1-mediated DNA methylation in breast cancer cells. This may represent a potential miRNA-based strategy to modulate the expression of ER-alpha and provide a novel perspective for investigating the role of miRNAs in treating breast cancer.. Breast cancer remains the most prevalent cancer among women worldwide. The expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) is an important marker for prognosis. ER-alpha status may be positive or negative in breast cancer cells, although the cause of negative or positive status is not yet fully characterized. In the present study, the expression of ER-alpha and miRNA-148a was assessed in two breast cancer cell lines, HCC1937 and MCF7. An association between ER-alpha and miRNA-148a expression was identified. It was then demonstrated that DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) is a target of miRNA-148a, which may suppress the expression of ER-alpha via DNA methylation. Finally, an miRNA-148a mimic or inhibitor was transfected into MCF7 cells; the miRNA-148a mimic increased ER-alpha expression whereas the miRNA-148a inhibitor decreased ER-alpha expression. In conclusion, it was identified that miRNA-148a regulates ER-alpha expression through DNMT1-mediated DNA methylation in breast cancer cells. This may represent a potential miRNA-based strategy to modulate the expression of ER-alpha and provide a novel perspective for investigating the role of miRNAs in treating breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: BRCA1 function is inactivated through BRCA1 promoter methylation in a substantial number of triple-negative breast cancers. We investigated the impact of BRCA1-methylation status on the efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with triple-negative breast cancer or with non-triple-negative breast cancer. METHODS: BRCA1 promoter methylation was assessed in 1163 unselected breast cancer patients. Methylation was evaluated using a methylation-specific PCR (MSP) assay. RESULTS: In the subgroup of 167 triple-negative breast cancer patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy, patients with BRCA1-methylated tumors had a superior 10-year disease-free survival (DFS)(78% versus 55%, P = 0.009) and 10-year disease-specific survival (DSS) (85% versus 69%, P = 0.024) than those with BRCA1-unmethylated tumors, and BRCA1 methylation was an independent favorable predictor of DFS and DSS in a multivariate analysis in this subgroup [DFS: hazard ratio (HR) = 0.45; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.24-0.84; P = 0.019; DSS: HR = 0.43; 95% CI = 0.19-0.95; P = 0.044]. In contrast, in 675 non-triple-negative breast cancer patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy, BRCA1 methylation was an unfavorable predictor of DFS and DSS in univariate analysis (DFS: HR = 1.56; 95% CI 1.16-2.12; P = 0.003; DSS: HR = 1.53; 95% CI = 1.05-2.21; P = 0.026). CONCLUSIONS: Triple-negative breast cancer patients with BRCA1-methylated tumors are sensitive to adjuvant chemotherapy and have a favorable survival compared with patients with BRCA1-unmethylated triple-negative tumors.. BACKGROUND: BRCA1 function is inactivated through BRCA1 promoter methylation in a substantial number of triple-negative breast cancers. We investigated the impact of BRCA1-methylation status on the efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with triple-negative breast cancer or with non-triple-negative breast cancer. METHODS: BRCA1 promoter methylation was assessed in 1163 unselected breast cancer patients. Methylation was evaluated using a methylation-specific PCR (MSP) assay. RESULTS: In the subgroup of 167 triple-negative breast cancer patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy, patients with BRCA1-methylated tumors had a superior 10-year disease-free survival (DFS)(78% versus 55%, P = 0.009) and 10-year disease-specific survival (DSS) (85% versus 69%, P = 0.024) than those with BRCA1-unmethylated tumors, and BRCA1 methylation was an independent favorable predictor of DFS and DSS in a multivariate analysis in this subgroup [DFS: hazard ratio (HR) = 0.45; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.24-0.84; P = 0.019; DSS: HR = 0.43; 95% CI = 0.19-0.95; P = 0.044]. In contrast, in 675 non-triple-negative breast cancer patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy, BRCA1 methylation was an unfavorable predictor of DFS and DSS in univariate analysis (DFS: HR = 1.56; 95% CI 1.16-2.12; P = 0.003; DSS: HR = 1.53; 95% CI = 1.05-2.21; P = 0.026). CONCLUSIONS: Triple-negative breast cancer patients with BRCA1-methylated tumors are sensitive to adjuvant chemotherapy and have a favorable survival compared with patients with BRCA1-unmethylated triple-negative tumors.

BACKGROUND: Peripheral blood DNA methylation may be associated with breast cancer, but studies of candidate genes, global, and genome-wide DNA methylation have been inconsistent. METHODS: We performed an epigenome-wide study using Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips with prospectively collected blood DNA samples from the Sister Study, (1552 cases, 1224 sub-cohort). Differentially methylated CpGs were identified using case-cohort proportional hazard models and replicated using deposited data from EPIC-Italy (n = 329). Correlation between methylation and time-to-diagnosis was examined using robust linear regression. Causal/consequential relationships of methylation to breast cancer was examined by Mendelian randomization using OncoArray 500K SNP data. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: We identified 9601 CpG markers associated with invasive breast cancer (false discovery rate FDR q < 0.01), with 510 meeting a strict Bonferroni correction threshold (10-7). 2095 of these CpGs replicated in the independent EPIC-Italy dataset, including 144 meeting the Bonferroni threshold. Sister Study women who developed ductal carcinoma in situ had methylation similar to non-cases. Most (1501; 71.6%) differentially methylated CpGs (dmCpGs) showed lower methylation in invasive cases. In case-only analysis methylation was statistically significantly associated (FDR q < 0.05) with time-to-diagnosis for 892 (42.6%) of the dmCpGs. Analyses based on genetic association suggest that methylation differences are likely a consequence rather than a cause of breast cancer. Pathway analysis shows enrichment of breast cancer-related gene pathways, and dmCpGs are overrepresented in known breast cancer susceptibility genes. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that DNA methylation profile of blood starts to change in response to invasive breast cancer years before the tumor is clinically detected.. BACKGROUND: Peripheral blood DNA methylation may be associated with breast cancer, but studies of candidate genes, global, and genome-wide DNA methylation have been inconsistent. METHODS: We performed an epigenome-wide study using Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips with prospectively collected blood DNA samples from the Sister Study, (1552 cases, 1224 sub-cohort). Differentially methylated CpGs were identified using case-cohort proportional hazard models and replicated using deposited data from EPIC-Italy (n = 329). Correlation between methylation and time-to-diagnosis was examined using robust linear regression. Causal/consequential relationships of methylation to breast cancer was examined by Mendelian randomization using OncoArray 500K SNP data. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: We identified 9601 CpG markers associated with invasive breast cancer (false discovery rate FDR q < 0.01), with 510 meeting a strict Bonferroni correction threshold (10-7). 2095 of these CpGs replicated in the independent EPIC-Italy dataset, including 144 meeting the Bonferroni threshold. Sister Study women who developed ductal carcinoma in situ had methylation similar to non-cases. Most (1501; 71.6%) differentially methylated CpGs (dmCpGs) showed lower methylation in invasive cases. In case-only analysis methylation was statistically significantly associated (FDR q < 0.05) with time-to-diagnosis for 892 (42.6%) of the dmCpGs. Analyses based on genetic association suggest that methylation differences are likely a consequence rather than a cause of breast cancer. Pathway analysis shows enrichment of breast cancer-related gene pathways, and dmCpGs are overrepresented in known breast cancer susceptibility genes. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that DNA methylation profile of blood starts to change in response to invasive breast cancer years before the tumor is clinically detected.

Background: Promoter methylation has been observed for several genes in association with cancer development and progression. Hypermethylation mediated-silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) may contribute to breast cancer pathogenesis. The present study was conducted to investigate the promoter methylation status of BRCA1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A genes in Indian women with breast cancer. Materials and Methods: Promoter methylation was evaluated in DNA extracted from mononuclear cells (MNCs) in peripheral blood samples of 60 histopathologically confirmed newly diagnosed, untreated cases of breast cancer as well as 60 age and sex matched healthy controls using MS-PCR. Association of promoter methylation with breast cancer-specific mortality was analyzed with Cox proportional hazards models. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed for overall survival of the breast cancer patients. Results: We observed a significant increase of BRCA1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A promoter methylation levels by 51.7% (P <0.001), 55.0% (P <0.001) and 46.6% (P <0.001), respectively, when compared to healthy controls. A strong correlation was noted between hypermethylation of the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 (P= 0.009), DAPK1 (P= 0.008) and RASSF1A (P= 0.02)) with early and advanced stages of breast cancer patients. We also found that breast cancer-specific mortality was significantly associated with promoter methylation of BRCA1 [HR and 95% CI: 3.25 (1.448-7.317)] and DAPK1 [HR and 95% CI: 2.32 (1.05-5.11)], whereas limited significant link was evident with RASSF1A [HR and 95% CI: 1.54 (0.697-3.413]. Conclusion: Our results suggest that promoter methylation of BRCA1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A genes may be associated with disease progression and poor overall survival of Indian women with breast cancer.. Background: Promoter methylation has been observed for several genes in association with cancer development and progression. Hypermethylation mediated-silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) may contribute to breast cancer pathogenesis. The present study was conducted to investigate the promoter methylation status of BRCA1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A genes in Indian women with breast cancer. Materials and Methods: Promoter methylation was evaluated in DNA extracted from mononuclear cells (MNCs) in peripheral blood samples of 60 histopathologically confirmed newly diagnosed, untreated cases of breast cancer as well as 60 age and sex matched healthy controls using MS-PCR. Association of promoter methylation with breast cancer-specific mortality was analyzed with Cox proportional hazards models. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed for overall survival of the breast cancer patients. Results: We observed a significant increase of BRCA1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A promoter methylation levels by 51.7% (P <0.001), 55.0% (P <0.001) and 46.6% (P <0.001), respectively, when compared to healthy controls. A strong correlation was noted between hypermethylation of the tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 (P= 0.009), DAPK1 (P= 0.008) and RASSF1A (P= 0.02)) with early and advanced stages of breast cancer patients. We also found that breast cancer-specific mortality was significantly associated with promoter methylation of BRCA1 [HR and 95% CI: 3.25 (1.448-7.317)] and DAPK1 [HR and 95% CI: 2.32 (1.05-5.11)], whereas limited significant link was evident with RASSF1A [HR and 95% CI: 1.54 (0.697-3.413]. Conclusion: Our results suggest that promoter methylation of BRCA1, DAPK1 and RASSF1A genes may be associated with disease progression and poor overall survival of Indian women with breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: Resistance to trastuzumab is a problem that remains to be solved in HER2-positive breast cancer. We aimed to characterize profiles of genetic and epigenetic alterations in cancer-related pathways in HER2-positive breast cancers, using biopsy tissue samples obtained from patients enrolled in a prospective neoadjuvant clinical trial. METHODS: HER2-positive breast cancer tissue samples were collected and processed with the PAXgene Tissue System. A total of 24 breast cancers were analyzed. Genetic alterations of 409 cancer-related genes were analyzed by a bench-top next-generation sequencer. DNA methylation statuses were analyzed by a bead array with 485,512 probes. RESULTS: The WNT pathway was potentially activated by aberrant methylation of its negative regulators, such as DKK3 and SFRP1, in 9 breast cancers. The AKT/mTOR pathway was activated by mutations of PIK3CA in 5 breast cancers. The Notch pathway was potentially activated by mutations of NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 in 4 breast cancers. The p53 pathway was inactivated by mutations of TP53 in 13 breast cancers and potentially by aberrant methylation of its downstream genes in 10 breast cancers. Cell adhesion was affected by mutations of CDH1 in 1 breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Genes involved in cancer-related pathways were frequently affected not only by genetic but also by epigenetic alterations in HER2-positive breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: Resistance to trastuzumab is a problem that remains to be solved in HER2-positive breast cancer. We aimed to characterize profiles of genetic and epigenetic alterations in cancer-related pathways in HER2-positive breast cancers, using biopsy tissue samples obtained from patients enrolled in a prospective neoadjuvant clinical trial. METHODS: HER2-positive breast cancer tissue samples were collected and processed with the PAXgene Tissue System. A total of 24 breast cancers were analyzed. Genetic alterations of 409 cancer-related genes were analyzed by a bench-top next-generation sequencer. DNA methylation statuses were analyzed by a bead array with 485,512 probes. RESULTS: The WNT pathway was potentially activated by aberrant methylation of its negative regulators, such as DKK3 and SFRP1, in 9 breast cancers. The AKT/mTOR pathway was activated by mutations of PIK3CA in 5 breast cancers. The Notch pathway was potentially activated by mutations of NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 in 4 breast cancers. The p53 pathway was inactivated by mutations of TP53 in 13 breast cancers and potentially by aberrant methylation of its downstream genes in 10 breast cancers. Cell adhesion was affected by mutations of CDH1 in 1 breast cancer. CONCLUSION: Genes involved in cancer-related pathways were frequently affected not only by genetic but also by epigenetic alterations in HER2-positive breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Neoplastic cells harbor both hypomethylated and hypermethylated regions of DNA. Whereas hypomethylation is found mainly in repeat sequences, regional hypermethylation has been linked to the transcriptional silencing of certain tumor suppressor genes. We attempted to search for candidate genes involved in breast/prostate carcinogenesis, using the criteria that they should be expressed in primary cultures of normal breast/prostate epithelial cells but are frequently downregulated in breast/prostate cancer cell lines and that their promoters are hypermethylated. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified several dozens of candidates among 194 homeobox and related genes using Systematic Multiplex RT-PCR and among 23,000 known genes and 23,000 other expressed sequences in the human genome by DNA microarray hybridization. An additional examination, by real-time qRT-PCR of clinical specimens of breast cancer, further narrowed the list of the candidates. Among them, the most frequently downregulated genes in tumors were NP_775756 and ZNF537, from the homeobox gene search and the genome-wide search, respectively. To our surprise, we later discovered that these genes belong to the same gene family, the 3-member Teashirt family, bearing the new names of TSHZ2 and TSHZ3. We subsequently determined the methylation status of their gene promoters. The TSHZ3 gene promoter was found to be methylated in all the breast/prostate cancer cell lines and some of the breast cancer clinical specimens analyzed. The TSHZ2 gene promoter, on the other hand, was unmethylated except for the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. The TSHZ1 gene was always expressed, and its promoter was unmethylated in all cases. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: TSHZ2 and TSHZ3 genes turned out to be the most interesting candidates for novel tumor suppressor genes. Expression of both genes is downregulated. However, differential promoter methylation suggests the existence of distinctive mechanisms of transcriptional inactivation for these genes.. BACKGROUND: Neoplastic cells harbor both hypomethylated and hypermethylated regions of DNA. Whereas hypomethylation is found mainly in repeat sequences, regional hypermethylation has been linked to the transcriptional silencing of certain tumor suppressor genes. We attempted to search for candidate genes involved in breast/prostate carcinogenesis, using the criteria that they should be expressed in primary cultures of normal breast/prostate epithelial cells but are frequently downregulated in breast/prostate cancer cell lines and that their promoters are hypermethylated. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified several dozens of candidates among 194 homeobox and related genes using Systematic Multiplex RT-PCR and among 23,000 known genes and 23,000 other expressed sequences in the human genome by DNA microarray hybridization. An additional examination, by real-time qRT-PCR of clinical specimens of breast cancer, further narrowed the list of the candidates. Among them, the most frequently downregulated genes in tumors were NP_775756 and ZNF537, from the homeobox gene search and the genome-wide search, respectively. To our surprise, we later discovered that these genes belong to the same gene family, the 3-member Teashirt family, bearing the new names of TSHZ2 and TSHZ3. We subsequently determined the methylation status of their gene promoters. The TSHZ3 gene promoter was found to be methylated in all the breast/prostate cancer cell lines and some of the breast cancer clinical specimens analyzed. The TSHZ2 gene promoter, on the other hand, was unmethylated except for the MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line. The TSHZ1 gene was always expressed, and its promoter was unmethylated in all cases. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: TSHZ2 and TSHZ3 genes turned out to be the most interesting candidates for novel tumor suppressor genes. Expression of both genes is downregulated. However, differential promoter methylation suggests the existence of distinctive mechanisms of transcriptional inactivation for these genes.

Aberrant promoter methylation of genes is a common molecular event in breast cancer. Thus, DNA methylation analysis is expected to be a new tool for cancer diagnosis. In this article, we have established a new, high-performance DNA methylation assay, the one-step methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (OS-MSP) assay, which is optimized for analyzing gene methylation in serum DNA. The OS-MSP assay is designed to detect aberrant promoter methylation of GSTP1, RASSF1A, and RARbeta2 genes in serum DNA. Moreover, two quality control markers were designed for monitoring the bisulfite conversion efficiency and measuring the DNA content in the serum. Serum samples were collected from patients with primary (n = 101, stages I-III) and metastatic breast cancers (n = 58) as well as from healthy controls (n = 87). If methylation of at least one of the three genes was observed, the OS-MSP assay was considered positive. The sensitivity of this assay was significantly higher than that of the assay involving conventional tumor markers (CEA and/or CA15-3) for stages I (24 vs. 8%) and II (26 vs. 8%) breast cancer and similar to that of the assay involving the conventional tumor markers for stage III (18 vs. 19%) and metastatic breast cancers (55 vs. 59%). The results of the OS-MSP assay and those of the assay involving CEA and/or CA15-3 seemed to compensate for each other because sensitivity of these assays increased to 78% when used in combination for metastatic breast cancer. In conclusion, we have developed a new OS-MSP assay with improved sensitivity and convenience; thus, this assay is more suitable for detecting aberrant promoter methylation in serum DNA. Moreover, the combination of the OS-MSP assay and the assay involving CEA and/or CA15-3 is promising for enhancing the sensitivity of diagnosis of metastatic breast cancer.. Aberrant promoter methylation of genes is a common molecular event in breast cancer. Thus, DNA methylation analysis is expected to be a new tool for cancer diagnosis. In this article, we have established a new, high-performance DNA methylation assay, the one-step methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (OS-MSP) assay, which is optimized for analyzing gene methylation in serum DNA. The OS-MSP assay is designed to detect aberrant promoter methylation of GSTP1, RASSF1A, and RARbeta2 genes in serum DNA. Moreover, two quality control markers were designed for monitoring the bisulfite conversion efficiency and measuring the DNA content in the serum. Serum samples were collected from patients with primary (n = 101, stages I-III) and metastatic breast cancers (n = 58) as well as from healthy controls (n = 87). If methylation of at least one of the three genes was observed, the OS-MSP assay was considered positive. The sensitivity of this assay was significantly higher than that of the assay involving conventional tumor markers (CEA and/or CA15-3) for stages I (24 vs. 8%) and II (26 vs. 8%) breast cancer and similar to that of the assay involving the conventional tumor markers for stage III (18 vs. 19%) and metastatic breast cancers (55 vs. 59%). The results of the OS-MSP assay and those of the assay involving CEA and/or CA15-3 seemed to compensate for each other because sensitivity of these assays increased to 78% when used in combination for metastatic breast cancer. In conclusion, we have developed a new OS-MSP assay with improved sensitivity and convenience; thus, this assay is more suitable for detecting aberrant promoter methylation in serum DNA. Moreover, the combination of the OS-MSP assay and the assay involving CEA and/or CA15-3 is promising for enhancing the sensitivity of diagnosis of metastatic breast cancer.

DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that is associated with transcriptional silencing of gene expression in mammalian cells. Hypermethylation of the promoter CpG islands contributes to the loss of gene function of several tumor related genes, including estrogen receptor a (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR). Gene expression patterns are also heavily influenced by changes in chromatin structure during transcription. Indeed both the predominant mammalian DNA methyltransferase (DNMTI), and the histone deacetylases (HDACs) play crucial roles in maintaining transcriptionally repressive chromatin by forming suppressive complexes at replication foci. These new findings suggest that epigenetic changes might play a crucial role in gene inactivation in breast cancer. Further, inhibition of DNA methylation and histone deacetylation might be a therapeutic strategy in breast cancer, especially for those cancers with ER and PR negative phenotypes.. DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that is associated with transcriptional silencing of gene expression in mammalian cells. Hypermethylation of the promoter CpG islands contributes to the loss of gene function of several tumor related genes, including estrogen receptor a (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR). Gene expression patterns are also heavily influenced by changes in chromatin structure during transcription. Indeed both the predominant mammalian DNA methyltransferase (DNMTI), and the histone deacetylases (HDACs) play crucial roles in maintaining transcriptionally repressive chromatin by forming suppressive complexes at replication foci. These new findings suggest that epigenetic changes might play a crucial role in gene inactivation in breast cancer. Further, inhibition of DNA methylation and histone deacetylation might be a therapeutic strategy in breast cancer, especially for those cancers with ER and PR negative phenotypes.

Aberrant DNA methylation of promoter CpG islands is associated with transcriptionally repressive heterochromatin in neoplasia. The dynamics of this epigenetic process in mediating the transition from an active to an inactive state of transcription remains to be elucidated, however. Here, we used the methylation-specific oligonucleotide microarray to map the methylation patterns of a CpG island, located within the promoter and the first exon regions of RASSF1A, in normal breast tissue controls, primary tumors, and breast cancer cell lines. Oligonucleotide pairs, spaced along the CpG island region, were designed to discriminate between methylated and unmethylated alleles of selected sites. The methylation-specific oligonucleotide data indicate that the majority of test samples show widespread methylation in the first exon of RASSF1A. In contrast, the promoter area was usually undermethylated in normal controls and in 32% of the primary tumors tested, whereas the rest of the primary tumors and breast cancer cell lines showed various degrees of methylation in the region. Methylation profiling of individual tumors further suggest that DNA methylation progressively spreads from the first exon into the promoter area of this gene. Functional analysis indicates that increased density of RASSF1A promoter methylation is associated with altered chromatin, marked by a depletion of acetylated histones and methylated histone 3-lysine 4 and an enrichment of methylated histone 3-lysine 9 in the studied area. The combination of these epigenetic modifications may engender a stable silencing of the gene in breast cancer cells. Thus, this study underscores the importance of detailed mapping of methylation patterns within a CpG island locus that may provide insights into the progressive nature of aberrant DNA methylation and its relationship with transcriptional silencing during the neoplastic process.. Aberrant DNA methylation of promoter CpG islands is associated with transcriptionally repressive heterochromatin in neoplasia. The dynamics of this epigenetic process in mediating the transition from an active to an inactive state of transcription remains to be elucidated, however. Here, we used the methylation-specific oligonucleotide microarray to map the methylation patterns of a CpG island, located within the promoter and the first exon regions of RASSF1A, in normal breast tissue controls, primary tumors, and breast cancer cell lines. Oligonucleotide pairs, spaced along the CpG island region, were designed to discriminate between methylated and unmethylated alleles of selected sites. The methylation-specific oligonucleotide data indicate that the majority of test samples show widespread methylation in the first exon of RASSF1A. In contrast, the promoter area was usually undermethylated in normal controls and in 32% of the primary tumors tested, whereas the rest of the primary tumors and breast cancer cell lines showed various degrees of methylation in the region. Methylation profiling of individual tumors further suggest that DNA methylation progressively spreads from the first exon into the promoter area of this gene. Functional analysis indicates that increased density of RASSF1A promoter methylation is associated with altered chromatin, marked by a depletion of acetylated histones and methylated histone 3-lysine 4 and an enrichment of methylated histone 3-lysine 9 in the studied area. The combination of these epigenetic modifications may engender a stable silencing of the gene in breast cancer cells. Thus, this study underscores the importance of detailed mapping of methylation patterns within a CpG island locus that may provide insights into the progressive nature of aberrant DNA methylation and its relationship with transcriptional silencing during the neoplastic process.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between hypermethylation of Runx3 gene promoter and estrogen receptor (ER) and the implications of Runx3 gene promoter hypermethylation in ER positive breast cancer. METHODS: Western blot and RT-PCR were used to detect the protein and mRNA expression of Runx3 gene in breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and SKBR3) and normal breast epithelium cell line (MCF10A). Immunohistochemical SP method was used to detect the expression of ER and Runx3 proteins in 113 tissue samples of breast cancer. Moreover, methylation specific PCR was used to detect RUN3 promoter methylation in cell lines MCF7, SKBR3, MCF10A and 113 tissue samples of breast cancer. RESULTS: Of the 3 cell lines, Runx3 protein and mRNA were detectable in MCF10A, but were absent in MCF7 and SKBR3. MCF7 had a high methylation status at Runx3 promoter, in contrast, MCF10A and SKBR3 showed unmethylated RUN3 promoter. Among the 113 cases of breast cancer, 68 cases were ER positive and 45 were negative. The positive rates of Runx3 protein expression in ER positive and negative tumors were 26.5% (18/68) and 66.7% (30/45), respectively (P<0.05). Runx3 promoter hypermethylation was seen in 82.4% (56/68) of ER positive breast cancer cases and 22.2% (10/45) of ER negative ones (P<0.05). Among 68 cases of ER positive cases, Runx3 promoter hypermethylation was positively correlated with the clinical tumor stage (OR=5.84, P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Runx3 gene promoter hypermethylation is present mainly in the ER positive breast cancers. Testing of Runx3 promoter methylation may provide additional reference for clinical stage and prognosis of breast cancer patients, especially in those with ER positive tumors.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between hypermethylation of Runx3 gene promoter and estrogen receptor (ER) and the implications of Runx3 gene promoter hypermethylation in ER positive breast cancer. METHODS: Western blot and RT-PCR were used to detect the protein and mRNA expression of Runx3 gene in breast cancer cell lines (MCF7 and SKBR3) and normal breast epithelium cell line (MCF10A). Immunohistochemical SP method was used to detect the expression of ER and Runx3 proteins in 113 tissue samples of breast cancer. Moreover, methylation specific PCR was used to detect RUN3 promoter methylation in cell lines MCF7, SKBR3, MCF10A and 113 tissue samples of breast cancer. RESULTS: Of the 3 cell lines, Runx3 protein and mRNA were detectable in MCF10A, but were absent in MCF7 and SKBR3. MCF7 had a high methylation status at Runx3 promoter, in contrast, MCF10A and SKBR3 showed unmethylated RUN3 promoter. Among the 113 cases of breast cancer, 68 cases were ER positive and 45 were negative. The positive rates of Runx3 protein expression in ER positive and negative tumors were 26.5% (18/68) and 66.7% (30/45), respectively (P<0.05). Runx3 promoter hypermethylation was seen in 82.4% (56/68) of ER positive breast cancer cases and 22.2% (10/45) of ER negative ones (P<0.05). Among 68 cases of ER positive cases, Runx3 promoter hypermethylation was positively correlated with the clinical tumor stage (OR=5.84, P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Runx3 gene promoter hypermethylation is present mainly in the ER positive breast cancers. Testing of Runx3 promoter methylation may provide additional reference for clinical stage and prognosis of breast cancer patients, especially in those with ER positive tumors.

BACKGROUND: CDH13 (cadherin 13) is a special cadherin cell adhesion molecule, and the methylation of its promoter causes inactivation in a considerable number of human cancers. To explore the association between CDH13 promoter methylation and breast cancer risk and prognosis, we systematically integrated published articles to investigate the diagnostic performance of the CDH13 methylation test for breast cancer. An independent DNA methylation microarray dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA) project was used to validate the results of the meta-analysis. METHODS: The relevant literature was searched using the PubMed, Cochrane Library, Web of Science and Google Scholar databases for articles published in English up to May 2015. Data were analyzed using random effect or fixed effect models. The effect sizes were estimated by measuring an odds ratio (OR) or hazard ratio (HR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI). A chi-squared based Q test and sensitivity analysis were performed to examine the between-study heterogeneity and the contribution of single studies to the final results, respectively. Funnel plots were constructed to evaluate publication bias. RESULTS: Seven hundred and twenty-six breast tumor samples and 422 controls were collected from 13 published studies. The data from the TCGA set include both tumor and normal samples. A significant association was observed between CDH13 promoter methylation and breast cancer, with an aggregated OR equal to 13.73 (95%CI: 8.09~23.31, z = 9.70, p<0.0001) as measured using the fixed effect model and 14.23 (95%CI: 5.06~40.05, z = 5.03, p<0.0001) as measured using a random effect model. The HR values were calculated as 0.77 (95%CI: 0.27~2.21, z = -0.49, p = 0.622) and 0.38 (95%CI: 0.09~1.69, z = -1.27, p = 0.20) for overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS), respectively, using the random effect model. This result indicated that breast cancer patients with CDH13 promoter methylation correlated non-significantly with prognosis and is therefore similar to the findings of the TCGA project. CONCLUSIONS: The methylation status of CDH13 promoter was strongly associated with breast cancer risk. However, CDH13 promoter methylation was not significantly related to the OS and DFS of breast cancer and may have limited prognostic value for breast cancer patients.. BACKGROUND: CDH13 (cadherin 13) is a special cadherin cell adhesion molecule, and the methylation of its promoter causes inactivation in a considerable number of human cancers. To explore the association between CDH13 promoter methylation and breast cancer risk and prognosis, we systematically integrated published articles to investigate the diagnostic performance of the CDH13 methylation test for breast cancer. An independent DNA methylation microarray dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas project (TCGA) project was used to validate the results of the meta-analysis. METHODS: The relevant literature was searched using the PubMed, Cochrane Library, Web of Science and Google Scholar databases for articles published in English up to May 2015. Data were analyzed using random effect or fixed effect models. The effect sizes were estimated by measuring an odds ratio (OR) or hazard ratio (HR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI). A chi-squared based Q test and sensitivity analysis were performed to examine the between-study heterogeneity and the contribution of single studies to the final results, respectively. Funnel plots were constructed to evaluate publication bias. RESULTS: Seven hundred and twenty-six breast tumor samples and 422 controls were collected from 13 published studies. The data from the TCGA set include both tumor and normal samples. A significant association was observed between CDH13 promoter methylation and breast cancer, with an aggregated OR equal to 13.73 (95%CI: 8.09~23.31, z = 9.70, p<0.0001) as measured using the fixed effect model and 14.23 (95%CI: 5.06~40.05, z = 5.03, p<0.0001) as measured using a random effect model. The HR values were calculated as 0.77 (95%CI: 0.27~2.21, z = -0.49, p = 0.622) and 0.38 (95%CI: 0.09~1.69, z = -1.27, p = 0.20) for overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS), respectively, using the random effect model. This result indicated that breast cancer patients with CDH13 promoter methylation correlated non-significantly with prognosis and is therefore similar to the findings of the TCGA project. CONCLUSIONS: The methylation status of CDH13 promoter was strongly associated with breast cancer risk. However, CDH13 promoter methylation was not significantly related to the OS and DFS of breast cancer and may have limited prognostic value for breast cancer patients.

. 
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the promoter methylation status and mRNA expression of APC gene in MCF10 model of breast cancer progression. METHODS: Methylation specific PCR and sodium bisufite genomic sequencing were employed to detect the methylation status of APC promoter 1A in normal breast tissues, conventional breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and MCF10 model cell lines including MCF10A (breast hyperplastic cell line, non-tumorigenic), MCF10AT (pre-malignant cell lines, producing slowly progressing hyperplastic and dysplastic lesions), MCF10DCIS.com (breast ductal carcinoma in-situ cell line, producing ductal carcinoma in-situ), MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, MCF10CA1h cell lines (invasive breast carcinoma cell line, forming aggressive tumors of different morphology and metastatic potential). In addition, mRNA expression of APC was determined by reverse transcriptase PCR and real-time PCR assays. RESULTS: Hypomethylation of APC promoter 1A was identified in hyperplastic cell line MCF10A, pre-malignant cell line MCF10AT, ductal carcinoma in-situ cell line MCF10DCIS.com, invasive carcinoma cell lines MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, MCF10CA1h and normal breast tissue. MCF-7 showed partial methylation at the promoter. Statistically significant reduction of APC mRNA expression was not found in all MCF10 cell lines and MCF-7, compared with that of normal breast tissue (MCF10AT, MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, MCF10CA1h and MCF10DCIS.com showed reduced mRNA expressions of APC at 0.27, 0.96, 1.78, 2.70, and 2.03 times respectively. MCF10A and MCF-7 even showed an increase of APC mRNA expression at 0.02 and 0.33 times, respectively). CONCLUSION: The aberrant promoter methylation of APC is not related to the breast cancer progression, at least in the MCF10 model system.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the promoter methylation status and mRNA expression of APC gene in MCF10 model of breast cancer progression. METHODS: Methylation specific PCR and sodium bisufite genomic sequencing were employed to detect the methylation status of APC promoter 1A in normal breast tissues, conventional breast cancer cell line MCF-7 and MCF10 model cell lines including MCF10A (breast hyperplastic cell line, non-tumorigenic), MCF10AT (pre-malignant cell lines, producing slowly progressing hyperplastic and dysplastic lesions), MCF10DCIS.com (breast ductal carcinoma in-situ cell line, producing ductal carcinoma in-situ), MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, MCF10CA1h cell lines (invasive breast carcinoma cell line, forming aggressive tumors of different morphology and metastatic potential). In addition, mRNA expression of APC was determined by reverse transcriptase PCR and real-time PCR assays. RESULTS: Hypomethylation of APC promoter 1A was identified in hyperplastic cell line MCF10A, pre-malignant cell line MCF10AT, ductal carcinoma in-situ cell line MCF10DCIS.com, invasive carcinoma cell lines MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, MCF10CA1h and normal breast tissue. MCF-7 showed partial methylation at the promoter. Statistically significant reduction of APC mRNA expression was not found in all MCF10 cell lines and MCF-7, compared with that of normal breast tissue (MCF10AT, MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, MCF10CA1h and MCF10DCIS.com showed reduced mRNA expressions of APC at 0.27, 0.96, 1.78, 2.70, and 2.03 times respectively. MCF10A and MCF-7 even showed an increase of APC mRNA expression at 0.02 and 0.33 times, respectively). CONCLUSION: The aberrant promoter methylation of APC is not related to the breast cancer progression, at least in the MCF10 model system.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of WT1 gene in breast carcinogenesis by analyses of the promoter methylation status and mRNA expression of WT1 gene in MCF10 model system of breast cancer progression. METHODS: Methylation specific PCR and sodium bisufite genomic sequencing were employed to detect methylation status of WT1 promoter in normal breast tissue, traditional breast cancer cell line MCF7 and MCF10 model series, including MCF10A (breast hyperplastic cell line, non-tumorigenic), MCF10AT (pre-malignant cell line, forming slowly progressing hyper and dysplastic lesions), MCF10DCIS.com (breast ductal carcinoma in situ cell line, forming ductal carcinoma in situ), and three invasive cell lines with metastatic potential (MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, and MCF10CA1h). Real time reverse transcription PCR assay was used to determine the mRNA expression levels of WT1 in various cell lines. RESULTS: Hypermethylation of WT1 promoter was identified in MCF7 and all MCF10 model cell lines (MCF10A, MCF10AT, MCF10DCIS.com, MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, and MCF10CA1h). Unexpectedly, an increased expression of WT1 mRNA was found in all MCF10 cell lines and MCF7 comparing with normal breast tissue [folds of overexpression: 3.23 (MCF10A), 1.94 (MCF10AT), 4.20 (MCF10CA1a), 1.53 (MCF10CA1d), 4.20 (MCF10CA1h), 4.35 (MCF10DCIS) and 28.69 (MCF7)]. CONCLUSIONS: Promoter methylation does not silence the mRNA expression of WT1 during the development of breast cancer. Overexpression of WT1 occurs in the early stages of breast cancer development, suggesting its role as an oncogene rather than a tumor suppressor gene.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of WT1 gene in breast carcinogenesis by analyses of the promoter methylation status and mRNA expression of WT1 gene in MCF10 model system of breast cancer progression. METHODS: Methylation specific PCR and sodium bisufite genomic sequencing were employed to detect methylation status of WT1 promoter in normal breast tissue, traditional breast cancer cell line MCF7 and MCF10 model series, including MCF10A (breast hyperplastic cell line, non-tumorigenic), MCF10AT (pre-malignant cell line, forming slowly progressing hyper and dysplastic lesions), MCF10DCIS.com (breast ductal carcinoma in situ cell line, forming ductal carcinoma in situ), and three invasive cell lines with metastatic potential (MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, and MCF10CA1h). Real time reverse transcription PCR assay was used to determine the mRNA expression levels of WT1 in various cell lines. RESULTS: Hypermethylation of WT1 promoter was identified in MCF7 and all MCF10 model cell lines (MCF10A, MCF10AT, MCF10DCIS.com, MCF10CA1a, MCF10CA1d, and MCF10CA1h). Unexpectedly, an increased expression of WT1 mRNA was found in all MCF10 cell lines and MCF7 comparing with normal breast tissue [folds of overexpression: 3.23 (MCF10A), 1.94 (MCF10AT), 4.20 (MCF10CA1a), 1.53 (MCF10CA1d), 4.20 (MCF10CA1h), 4.35 (MCF10DCIS) and 28.69 (MCF7)]. CONCLUSIONS: Promoter methylation does not silence the mRNA expression of WT1 during the development of breast cancer. Overexpression of WT1 occurs in the early stages of breast cancer development, suggesting its role as an oncogene rather than a tumor suppressor gene.

A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain 33 (ADAM33) gene is a transmembrane glycoprotein that mediates changes in cell adhesion and plays an important role in cancer progression. Since bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates are epigenetically toxic, the purpose of this study was to examine whether BPA and phthalate metabolites, including monoethyl phthalate (MEP), mononbutyl phthalate (MBP), monoisobutyl phthalate (MIBP), mono(2ethylhexyl) phthalate (MEHP), mono(2ethyl5hydroxyhexyl) phthalate (MEHHP), mono(2ethyl5carboxypentyl) phthalate (MECPP), and mono(2ethyl5oxohexyl) phthalate (MEOHP), have an epigenetic impact on ADAM33 and the incidence of breast cancer. CpG islands of breast cancer microarray datasets obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) were used to assess the ADAM33 methylation profile. We designed a casecontrol study including 44 cases and 22 agematched controls to detect the methylation status of intron 1 in ADAM33 from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in blood, using BSP, nested PCR, and bisulfite sequencing, and measured the in vivo gene expression of ADAM33 and the urinary concentrations of endocrinedisrupting chemicals (EDCs), using realtime PCR, highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS). Only one dataset, GSE32393, reached significance (P=0.016). ADAM33 expression and methylation frequencies at CpG site 3 in intron 1 were higher in the control group. We found a positive association between intron 1 methylation level and ADAM33 expression as well as urinary concentrations of MEHHP, MECPP, MEOHP and Sigma4MEHP (the sum of MEHP, MECPP, MEHHP, and MEOHP) in the cases. This study suggests that metabolites of phthalate such as MEHHP, MECPP, MEOHP and Sigma4MEHP may increase the intron 1 methylation level to elevate ADAM33 gene expression and have a protective effect on reducing the risk of breast cancer.. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain 33 (ADAM33) gene is a transmembrane glycoprotein that mediates changes in cell adhesion and plays an important role in cancer progression. Since bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates are epigenetically toxic, the purpose of this study was to examine whether BPA and phthalate metabolites, including monoethyl phthalate (MEP), mononbutyl phthalate (MBP), monoisobutyl phthalate (MIBP), mono(2ethylhexyl) phthalate (MEHP), mono(2ethyl5hydroxyhexyl) phthalate (MEHHP), mono(2ethyl5carboxypentyl) phthalate (MECPP), and mono(2ethyl5oxohexyl) phthalate (MEOHP), have an epigenetic impact on ADAM33 and the incidence of breast cancer. CpG islands of breast cancer microarray datasets obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) were used to assess the ADAM33 methylation profile. We designed a casecontrol study including 44 cases and 22 agematched controls to detect the methylation status of intron 1 in ADAM33 from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in blood, using BSP, nested PCR, and bisulfite sequencing, and measured the in vivo gene expression of ADAM33 and the urinary concentrations of endocrinedisrupting chemicals (EDCs), using realtime PCR, highperformance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS). Only one dataset, GSE32393, reached significance (P=0.016). ADAM33 expression and methylation frequencies at CpG site 3 in intron 1 were higher in the control group. We found a positive association between intron 1 methylation level and ADAM33 expression as well as urinary concentrations of MEHHP, MECPP, MEOHP and Sigma4MEHP (the sum of MEHP, MECPP, MEHHP, and MEOHP) in the cases. This study suggests that metabolites of phthalate such as MEHHP, MECPP, MEOHP and Sigma4MEHP may increase the intron 1 methylation level to elevate ADAM33 gene expression and have a protective effect on reducing the risk of breast cancer.

Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in women worldwide. Changes in DNA methylation in peripheral blood could be associated with malignancy at early stage. However, the BC-associated DNA methylation signatures in peripheral blood were largely unknown. Here, we performed a genome-wide methylation screening and identified a BC-associated differentially methylated CpG site cg27091787 in the hyaluronoglucosaminidase 2 gene (HYAL2) (discovery round with 72 BC case and 24 controls: p = 2.61 x 10(-9) adjusted for cell-type proportions). The substantially decreased methylation of cg27091787 in BC cases was confirmed in two validation rounds (first validation round with 338 BC case and 507 controls: p < 0.0001; second validation round with 189 BC case and 189 controls: p < 0.0001). In addition to cg27091787, the decreased methylation of a 650-bp CpG island shore of HYAL2 was also associated with increased risk of BC. Moreover, the expression and methylation of HYAL2 were inversely correlated with a p-value of 0.006. To note, the BC-associated decreased HYAL2 methylation was replicated in the T-cell fraction (p = 0.034). The cg27091787 methylation level enabled a powerful discrimination of early-stage BC cases (stages 0 and I) from healthy controls [area under curve (AUC) = 0.89], and was robust for the detection of BC in younger women as well (age < 50, AUC = 0.87). Our study reveals a strong association between decreased HYAL2 methylation in peripheral blood and BC, and provides a promising blood-based marker for the detection of early BC.. Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in women worldwide. Changes in DNA methylation in peripheral blood could be associated with malignancy at early stage. However, the BC-associated DNA methylation signatures in peripheral blood were largely unknown. Here, we performed a genome-wide methylation screening and identified a BC-associated differentially methylated CpG site cg27091787 in the hyaluronoglucosaminidase 2 gene (HYAL2) (discovery round with 72 BC case and 24 controls: p = 2.61 x 10(-9) adjusted for cell-type proportions). The substantially decreased methylation of cg27091787 in BC cases was confirmed in two validation rounds (first validation round with 338 BC case and 507 controls: p < 0.0001; second validation round with 189 BC case and 189 controls: p < 0.0001). In addition to cg27091787, the decreased methylation of a 650-bp CpG island shore of HYAL2 was also associated with increased risk of BC. Moreover, the expression and methylation of HYAL2 were inversely correlated with a p-value of 0.006. To note, the BC-associated decreased HYAL2 methylation was replicated in the T-cell fraction (p = 0.034). The cg27091787 methylation level enabled a powerful discrimination of early-stage BC cases (stages 0 and I) from healthy controls [area under curve (AUC) = 0.89], and was robust for the detection of BC in younger women as well (age < 50, AUC = 0.87). Our study reveals a strong association between decreased HYAL2 methylation in peripheral blood and BC, and provides a promising blood-based marker for the detection of early BC.

Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cancer in women worldwide. Changes in DNA methylation in peripheral blood could be associated with malignant diseases. Making use of screening results by llumina 27K Methylation Assay, we validated demethylation of five CpG sites of S100P gene in blood cell DNA of BC patients by three independent retrospective studies with subjects from different centers (Validation I: 235 familial BC case and 206 controls, odds ratio per -1% methylation > 1.03, and P < 6.00 x 10-8 for all five CpG sites; Validation II: 189 sporadic BC case and 189 controls, odds ratio per -1% methylation > 1.03, P < 8.0 x 10-5 for four CpG sites; Validation III: 156 sporadic BC case and 151 controls, odds ratio per -1% methylation > 1.03, P < 6.0 x 10-4 for four CpG sites). In addition, the blood-based S100P methylation pattern was similar among BC patients with differential clinical characteristics regardless of stage, receptor status and menopause status. The observed BC-associated decreased S100P methylation in blood mainly originates from the leucocytes subpopulations but not B cells. The methylation levels of most S100P CpG sites were inversely correlated with the expression of S100P in leucocytes (P < 1.2 x 10-4) and in tissue (P < 1.1 x 10-4). This study reveals significant association between blood-based decreased S100P methylation and BC, and provides another proof for the application of altered DNA methylation signatures from blood cells as potential markers for the detection of BC, especially for the early stage.. Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cancer in women worldwide. Changes in DNA methylation in peripheral blood could be associated with malignant diseases. Making use of screening results by llumina 27K Methylation Assay, we validated demethylation of five CpG sites of S100P gene in blood cell DNA of BC patients by three independent retrospective studies with subjects from different centers (Validation I: 235 familial BC case and 206 controls, odds ratio per -1% methylation > 1.03, and P < 6.00 x 10-8 for all five CpG sites; Validation II: 189 sporadic BC case and 189 controls, odds ratio per -1% methylation > 1.03, P < 8.0 x 10-5 for four CpG sites; Validation III: 156 sporadic BC case and 151 controls, odds ratio per -1% methylation > 1.03, P < 6.0 x 10-4 for four CpG sites). In addition, the blood-based S100P methylation pattern was similar among BC patients with differential clinical characteristics regardless of stage, receptor status and menopause status. The observed BC-associated decreased S100P methylation in blood mainly originates from the leucocytes subpopulations but not B cells. The methylation levels of most S100P CpG sites were inversely correlated with the expression of S100P in leucocytes (P < 1.2 x 10-4) and in tissue (P < 1.1 x 10-4). This study reveals significant association between blood-based decreased S100P methylation and BC, and provides another proof for the application of altered DNA methylation signatures from blood cells as potential markers for the detection of BC, especially for the early stage.

Like all cancers, breast cancer is considered to result in part from the accumulation of multiple genetic alterations leading to oncogene overexpression and tumor suppressor loss. More recently, the role of epigenetic change as a distinct and crucial mechanism to silence a variety of methylated tissue-specific and imprinted genes has emerged in many cancer types. This review will briefly discuss basic aspects of DNA methylation, recent advances in DNA methyltransferases, the role of altered chromatin organization and the concept of gene transcriptional regulation built on methylated CpGs. In particular, we discuss epigenetic regulation of certain critical tumor suppressor and growth regulatory genes implicated in breast cancer, and its relevance to breast cancer diagnosis, prognosis, progression and therapy.. Like all cancers, breast cancer is considered to result in part from the accumulation of multiple genetic alterations leading to oncogene overexpression and tumor suppressor loss. More recently, the role of epigenetic change as a distinct and crucial mechanism to silence a variety of methylated tissue-specific and imprinted genes has emerged in many cancer types. This review will briefly discuss basic aspects of DNA methylation, recent advances in DNA methyltransferases, the role of altered chromatin organization and the concept of gene transcriptional regulation built on methylated CpGs. In particular, we discuss epigenetic regulation of certain critical tumor suppressor and growth regulatory genes implicated in breast cancer, and its relevance to breast cancer diagnosis, prognosis, progression and therapy.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation plays a critical role in breast cancer development. Previous studies have identified DNA methylation marks in white blood cells as promising biomarkers for breast cancer. However, these studies were limited by low statistical power and potential biases. Utilizing a new methodology, we investigated DNA methylation marks for their associations with breast cancer risk. METHODS: Statistical models were built to predict levels of DNA methylation marks using genetic data and DNA methylation data from HumanMethylation450 BeadChip from the Framingham Heart Study (N=1,595). The prediction models were validated using data from the Women's Health Initiative (N=883). We applied these models to genome-wide association study (GWAS) data of 122,977 breast cancer cases and 105,974 controls to evaluate if the genetically predicted DNA methylation levels at CpGs are associated with breast cancer risk. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: Of the 62,938 CpG sites (CpGs) investigated, statistically significant associations with breast cancer risk were observed for 450 CpGs at a Bonferroni-corrected threshold of P<7.94 x 10-7, including 45 CpGs residing in 18 genomic regions which have not previously been associated with breast cancer risk. Of the remaining 405 CpGs located within 500 kilobase flaking regions of 70 GWAS-identified breast cancer risk variants, the associations for 11 CpGs were independent of GWAS-identified variants. Integrative analyses of genetic, DNA methylation and gene expression data found that 38 CpGs may affect breast cancer risk through regulating expression of 21 genes. CONCLUSION: Our new methodology can identify novel DNA methylation biomarkers for breast cancer risk and can be applied to other diseases.. BACKGROUND: DNA methylation plays a critical role in breast cancer development. Previous studies have identified DNA methylation marks in white blood cells as promising biomarkers for breast cancer. However, these studies were limited by low statistical power and potential biases. Utilizing a new methodology, we investigated DNA methylation marks for their associations with breast cancer risk. METHODS: Statistical models were built to predict levels of DNA methylation marks using genetic data and DNA methylation data from HumanMethylation450 BeadChip from the Framingham Heart Study (N=1,595). The prediction models were validated using data from the Women's Health Initiative (N=883). We applied these models to genome-wide association study (GWAS) data of 122,977 breast cancer cases and 105,974 controls to evaluate if the genetically predicted DNA methylation levels at CpGs are associated with breast cancer risk. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: Of the 62,938 CpG sites (CpGs) investigated, statistically significant associations with breast cancer risk were observed for 450 CpGs at a Bonferroni-corrected threshold of P<7.94 x 10-7, including 45 CpGs residing in 18 genomic regions which have not previously been associated with breast cancer risk. Of the remaining 405 CpGs located within 500 kilobase flaking regions of 70 GWAS-identified breast cancer risk variants, the associations for 11 CpGs were independent of GWAS-identified variants. Integrative analyses of genetic, DNA methylation and gene expression data found that 38 CpGs may affect breast cancer risk through regulating expression of 21 genes. CONCLUSION: Our new methodology can identify novel DNA methylation biomarkers for breast cancer risk and can be applied to other diseases.

Recently, we analysed the 8p11-12 genomic region for copy number and gene expression changes in a panel of human breast cancer cell lines and primary specimens. We found that SFRP1 (Secreted frizzled related protein 1) is frequently under expressed even in breast tumours with copy number increases in this genomic region. SFRP1 encodes a WNT signalling antagonist, and plays a role in the development of multiple solid tumour types. In this study, we analysed methylation-associated silencing of the SFRP1 gene in breast cancer cells with the 8p11-12 amplicon, and investigated the tumour suppressor properties of SFRP1 in breast cancer cells. SFRP1 expression was markedly reduced in both the breast cancer cell lines and primary tumour specimens relative to normal primary human mammary epithelial cells even when SFRP1 is amplified. Suppression of SFRP1 expression in breast cancer cells with an SFRP1 gene amplification is associated with SFRP1 promoter methylation. Furthermore, restoration of SFRP1 expression suppressed the growth of breast cancer cells in monolayer, and inhibited anchorage independent growth. We also examined the relationship between the silencing of SFRP1 gene and WNT signalling in breast cancer. Ectopic SFRP1 expression in breast cancer cells suppressed both canonical and non-canonical WNT signalling pathways, and SFRP1 expression was negatively associated with the expression of a subset of WNT responsive genes including RET and MSX2. Thus, down-regulation of SFRP1 can be triggered by epigenetic and/or genetic events and may contribute to the tumourigenesis of human breast cancer through both canonical and non-canonical WNT signalling pathways.. Recently, we analysed the 8p11-12 genomic region for copy number and gene expression changes in a panel of human breast cancer cell lines and primary specimens. We found that SFRP1 (Secreted frizzled related protein 1) is frequently under expressed even in breast tumours with copy number increases in this genomic region. SFRP1 encodes a WNT signalling antagonist, and plays a role in the development of multiple solid tumour types. In this study, we analysed methylation-associated silencing of the SFRP1 gene in breast cancer cells with the 8p11-12 amplicon, and investigated the tumour suppressor properties of SFRP1 in breast cancer cells. SFRP1 expression was markedly reduced in both the breast cancer cell lines and primary tumour specimens relative to normal primary human mammary epithelial cells even when SFRP1 is amplified. Suppression of SFRP1 expression in breast cancer cells with an SFRP1 gene amplification is associated with SFRP1 promoter methylation. Furthermore, restoration of SFRP1 expression suppressed the growth of breast cancer cells in monolayer, and inhibited anchorage independent growth. We also examined the relationship between the silencing of SFRP1 gene and WNT signalling in breast cancer. Ectopic SFRP1 expression in breast cancer cells suppressed both canonical and non-canonical WNT signalling pathways, and SFRP1 expression was negatively associated with the expression of a subset of WNT responsive genes including RET and MSX2. Thus, down-regulation of SFRP1 can be triggered by epigenetic and/or genetic events and may contribute to the tumourigenesis of human breast cancer through both canonical and non-canonical WNT signalling pathways.

Accumulating evidence has revealed that the methylation of lysines on nonhistones by histone lysine methyltransferases (HMTs) is crucial for regulating tumo-rigenesis and metastasis. However, whether the methy-lation of lysines on HMT complex components occurs and has functions in cancer progression is less well understood. WD repeat domain 5 (WDR5) is a core component of an HMT complex named mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)/Suppressor of Variegation, Enhancer of Zeste, and Trithorax 1 (SET1). In the present study, it was reported that lysines 207 and 325 (K207 and K325, respectively) of WDR5 were monomethylated by SETdomaincontaining protein methyltransferase 6. Disrupting the methylation of K207/K325 via a K207R/K325R doublesite mutation attenuated the WDR5 promotion of breast cancer cell proliferation and migration. Methylation of K207/K325 on WDR5 partially contributed to maintaining global histone trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 levels, but did not affect MLL/SET1 complex assembly. These results further understanding of a potential posttranslational modification of WDR5, and imply that the methylation of lysines on HMT complex components is crucial for regulating human carcinogenesis.. Accumulating evidence has revealed that the methylation of lysines on nonhistones by histone lysine methyltransferases (HMTs) is crucial for regulating tumo-rigenesis and metastasis. However, whether the methy-lation of lysines on HMT complex components occurs and has functions in cancer progression is less well understood. WD repeat domain 5 (WDR5) is a core component of an HMT complex named mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)/Suppressor of Variegation, Enhancer of Zeste, and Trithorax 1 (SET1). In the present study, it was reported that lysines 207 and 325 (K207 and K325, respectively) of WDR5 were monomethylated by SETdomaincontaining protein methyltransferase 6. Disrupting the methylation of K207/K325 via a K207R/K325R doublesite mutation attenuated the WDR5 promotion of breast cancer cell proliferation and migration. Methylation of K207/K325 on WDR5 partially contributed to maintaining global histone trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 levels, but did not affect MLL/SET1 complex assembly. These results further understanding of a potential posttranslational modification of WDR5, and imply that the methylation of lysines on HMT complex components is crucial for regulating human carcinogenesis.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the effects of chemotherapeutic drugs on DNA methylation status of leukocytes, which may be predictive of treatment benefits and toxicities. Based on a prospective national study, we characterize the changes in leukocyte DNA methylome from pre- to post-chemotherapy (approximately 4 months apart) in 93 patients treated for early stage breast cancer and 48 matched non-cancer controls. We further examined significant methylation changes with perceived cognitive impairment, a clinically significant problem related to cancer and chemotherapy. RESULTS: Approximately 4.2% of the CpG sites measured using the Illumina 450K methylation array underwent significant changes after chemotherapy (p < 1e-7), in comparison to a stable DNA methylome in controls. Post-chemotherapy, the estimated relative proportions of B cells and CD4(+) T cells were decreased by a median of 100% and 39%, respectively, whereas the proportion of monocytes was increased by a median of 91%. After controlling for leukocyte composition, 568 CpGs from 460 genes were still significantly altered following chemotherapy. With additional adjustment for chemotherapy regimen, cumulative infusions, growth factors, and steroids, changes in four CpGs remained significant, including cg16936953 in VMP1/MIR21, cg01252023 in CORO1B, cg11859398 in SDK1, and cg19956914 in SUMF2. The most significant CpG, cg16936953, was also associated with cognitive decline in breast cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: Chemotherapy profoundly alters the composition and DNA methylation landscape of leukocytes in breast cancer patients. Our results shed light on the epigenetic response of circulating immune cell populations to cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs and provide possible epigenetic links to the degeneration of cognitive function associated with chemotherapy.. BACKGROUND: Little is known about the effects of chemotherapeutic drugs on DNA methylation status of leukocytes, which may be predictive of treatment benefits and toxicities. Based on a prospective national study, we characterize the changes in leukocyte DNA methylome from pre- to post-chemotherapy (approximately 4 months apart) in 93 patients treated for early stage breast cancer and 48 matched non-cancer controls. We further examined significant methylation changes with perceived cognitive impairment, a clinically significant problem related to cancer and chemotherapy. RESULTS: Approximately 4.2% of the CpG sites measured using the Illumina 450K methylation array underwent significant changes after chemotherapy (p < 1e-7), in comparison to a stable DNA methylome in controls. Post-chemotherapy, the estimated relative proportions of B cells and CD4(+) T cells were decreased by a median of 100% and 39%, respectively, whereas the proportion of monocytes was increased by a median of 91%. After controlling for leukocyte composition, 568 CpGs from 460 genes were still significantly altered following chemotherapy. With additional adjustment for chemotherapy regimen, cumulative infusions, growth factors, and steroids, changes in four CpGs remained significant, including cg16936953 in VMP1/MIR21, cg01252023 in CORO1B, cg11859398 in SDK1, and cg19956914 in SUMF2. The most significant CpG, cg16936953, was also associated with cognitive decline in breast cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: Chemotherapy profoundly alters the composition and DNA methylation landscape of leukocytes in breast cancer patients. Our results shed light on the epigenetic response of circulating immune cell populations to cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs and provide possible epigenetic links to the degeneration of cognitive function associated with chemotherapy.

In addition to classic genetic mechanisms such as deletions and mutations, growth regulatory genes can be inactivated via methylation of cytosine-residues in their promoter regions. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands is now recognized as an important and early event in carcinogenesis. Detection of methylated DNA in serum or plasma has been suggested to be a marker for early cancer development. We examined methylation changes in RASSF1A, a growth regulatory gene in plasma DNA from blood collected before diagnosis from women with breast cancer and from controls. Samples were from two sets of subjects, 28 women with breast cancer and 10 of their unaffected siblings, and 33 women with breast cancer and 29 age- and ethnicity-matched population-based controls. Using methylation specific PCR, we found 11 of 61 (18%) cases were positive for methylation of RASSF1A in their plasma DNA collected before diagnosis. Two of 10 healthy high-risk sibling controls (20%) had plasma DNA positive for RASSF1A methylation in their plasma DNA compared with 0 of 29 (0%) population-based controls. Tumor tissue was available for 12 cases and all were positive for RASSF1A methylation. These results, if replicated, suggest that aberrant promoter hypermethylation in serum/plasma DNA may be common among high-risk women and may be present years before cancer diagnosis.. In addition to classic genetic mechanisms such as deletions and mutations, growth regulatory genes can be inactivated via methylation of cytosine-residues in their promoter regions. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands is now recognized as an important and early event in carcinogenesis. Detection of methylated DNA in serum or plasma has been suggested to be a marker for early cancer development. We examined methylation changes in RASSF1A, a growth regulatory gene in plasma DNA from blood collected before diagnosis from women with breast cancer and from controls. Samples were from two sets of subjects, 28 women with breast cancer and 10 of their unaffected siblings, and 33 women with breast cancer and 29 age- and ethnicity-matched population-based controls. Using methylation specific PCR, we found 11 of 61 (18%) cases were positive for methylation of RASSF1A in their plasma DNA collected before diagnosis. Two of 10 healthy high-risk sibling controls (20%) had plasma DNA positive for RASSF1A methylation in their plasma DNA compared with 0 of 29 (0%) population-based controls. Tumor tissue was available for 12 cases and all were positive for RASSF1A methylation. These results, if replicated, suggest that aberrant promoter hypermethylation in serum/plasma DNA may be common among high-risk women and may be present years before cancer diagnosis.

As a tumor suppressor gene, 14-3-3 sigma has been reported to be frequently methylated in breast cancer. However, the clinical effect of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation remains to be verified. This study was performed to assess the clinicopathological significance and diagnostic value of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation in breast cancer. 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation was found to be notably higher in breast cancer than in benign lesions and normal breast tissue samples. We did not observe that 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation was linked to the age status, tumor grade, clinic stage, lymph node status, histological subtype, ER status, PR status, HER2 status, or overall survival of patients with breast cancer. The combined sensitivity, specificity, AUC (area under the curve), positive likelihood ratios (PLR), negative likelihood ratios (NLR), diagnostic odds ratio (DOR), and post-test probability values (if the pretest probability was 30%) of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation in blood samples of breast cancer patients vs. healthy subjects were 0.69, 0.99, 0.86, 95, 0.31, 302, and 98%, respectively. Our findings suggest that 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation may be associated with the carcinogenesis of breast cancer and that the use of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation might represent a useful blood-based biomarker for the clinical diagnosis of breast cancer.. As a tumor suppressor gene, 14-3-3 sigma has been reported to be frequently methylated in breast cancer. However, the clinical effect of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation remains to be verified. This study was performed to assess the clinicopathological significance and diagnostic value of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation in breast cancer. 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation was found to be notably higher in breast cancer than in benign lesions and normal breast tissue samples. We did not observe that 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation was linked to the age status, tumor grade, clinic stage, lymph node status, histological subtype, ER status, PR status, HER2 status, or overall survival of patients with breast cancer. The combined sensitivity, specificity, AUC (area under the curve), positive likelihood ratios (PLR), negative likelihood ratios (NLR), diagnostic odds ratio (DOR), and post-test probability values (if the pretest probability was 30%) of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation in blood samples of breast cancer patients vs. healthy subjects were 0.69, 0.99, 0.86, 95, 0.31, 302, and 98%, respectively. Our findings suggest that 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation may be associated with the carcinogenesis of breast cancer and that the use of 14-3-3 sigma promoter methylation might represent a useful blood-based biomarker for the clinical diagnosis of breast cancer.

Histone modifications are thought to control the regulation of genetic programs in normal physiology and cancer. Methylation (mono-, di-, and tri-methylation) on histone H3 lysine (K) 27 induces transcriptional repression, and thereby participates in controlling gene expression patterns. Enhancer of zeste (EZH) 2, a methyltransferase and component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), plays an essential role in the epigenetic maintenance of the H3K27me3 repressive chromatin mark. Abnormal EZH2 expression has been associated with various cancers including breast cancer. Here, we discuss the contribution of EZH2 and the PRC2 complex in controlling the H3K27 methylation status and subsequent consequences on genomic instability and the cell cycle in breast cancer cells. We also discuss distinct molecular mechanisms used by EZH2 to suppress BRCA1 functions.. Histone modifications are thought to control the regulation of genetic programs in normal physiology and cancer. Methylation (mono-, di-, and tri-methylation) on histone H3 lysine (K) 27 induces transcriptional repression, and thereby participates in controlling gene expression patterns. Enhancer of zeste (EZH) 2, a methyltransferase and component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), plays an essential role in the epigenetic maintenance of the H3K27me3 repressive chromatin mark. Abnormal EZH2 expression has been associated with various cancers including breast cancer. Here, we discuss the contribution of EZH2 and the PRC2 complex in controlling the H3K27 methylation status and subsequent consequences on genomic instability and the cell cycle in breast cancer cells. We also discuss distinct molecular mechanisms used by EZH2 to suppress BRCA1 functions.

We have previously shown that the distal promoter (promoter B) of the estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) gene is responsible for the enhanced expression of the ER alpha gene seen in human breast cancer and that a novel trans-acting factor, estrogen receptor promoter B associated factor 1 (ERBF-1), is required for transcription from promoter B in breast cancer cells. In development of breast cancer, loss of ER alpha gene expression is one of the most important steps in acquiring hormone resistance, though the mechanisms are poorly understood. Recent studies have reported that methylation of the ER alpha gene promoter A and exon 1 was inversely associated with ER alpha gene expression in human breast cancer and cell lines. The methylation status of the promoter B region, which is responsible for overexpression of ER alpha protein in cancer tissue, has not been investigated. In this report, we found that the methylation status of promoter B, as well as that of promoter A, was inversely associated with ER alpha gene expression in human breast cancer and cell lines. Specific methylation of ER alpha gene promoters in vitro directly decreased transcription of the ER alpha gene in a reporter assay. Demethylating treatment induced transcription of ER alpha mRNA from promoter B in ZR-75-1 cells, which showed no transcription from promoter B, despite weak ERBF-1 expression, but not in ER alpha-negative MDA-MB-231 and BT-20 cells, which lack ERBF-1. ZR-75-1 cells showed promoter activity equal to that of MCF-7 cells in a reporter assay. Our results indicate that methylation of promoter B of the ER alpha gene is important for loss of ER alpha gene expression in human breast cancer, and methylation of the promoters can directly modulate ER alpha gene expression. However, loss of critical transcriptional factors such as ERBF-1 may also be involved in some ER alpha-negative cases.. We have previously shown that the distal promoter (promoter B) of the estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) gene is responsible for the enhanced expression of the ER alpha gene seen in human breast cancer and that a novel trans-acting factor, estrogen receptor promoter B associated factor 1 (ERBF-1), is required for transcription from promoter B in breast cancer cells. In development of breast cancer, loss of ER alpha gene expression is one of the most important steps in acquiring hormone resistance, though the mechanisms are poorly understood. Recent studies have reported that methylation of the ER alpha gene promoter A and exon 1 was inversely associated with ER alpha gene expression in human breast cancer and cell lines. The methylation status of the promoter B region, which is responsible for overexpression of ER alpha protein in cancer tissue, has not been investigated. In this report, we found that the methylation status of promoter B, as well as that of promoter A, was inversely associated with ER alpha gene expression in human breast cancer and cell lines. Specific methylation of ER alpha gene promoters in vitro directly decreased transcription of the ER alpha gene in a reporter assay. Demethylating treatment induced transcription of ER alpha mRNA from promoter B in ZR-75-1 cells, which showed no transcription from promoter B, despite weak ERBF-1 expression, but not in ER alpha-negative MDA-MB-231 and BT-20 cells, which lack ERBF-1. ZR-75-1 cells showed promoter activity equal to that of MCF-7 cells in a reporter assay. Our results indicate that methylation of promoter B of the ER alpha gene is important for loss of ER alpha gene expression in human breast cancer, and methylation of the promoters can directly modulate ER alpha gene expression. However, loss of critical transcriptional factors such as ERBF-1 may also be involved in some ER alpha-negative cases.

Tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs), a subpopulation of cancer cells with stem cell-like properties, are related to tumor relapse and metastasis. Our previous studies identified a distinct profile of microRNA (miRNA) expression in breast T-ICs (BT-ICs), and the dysregulated miRNAs contribute to the self-renewal and tumorigenesis of these cells. However, the underlying mechanisms for miRNA dysregulation in BT-ICs remain obscure. In the present study, we demonstrated that the expression and function of miR-34c were reduced in the BT-ICs of MCF-7 and SK-3rd cells, a breast cancer cell line enriched for BT-ICs. Ectopic expression of miR-34c reduced the self-renewal of BT-ICs, inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and suppressed migration of the tumor cells via silencing target gene Notch4. Furthermore, we identified a single hypermethylated CpG site in the promoter region of miR-34c gene that contributed to transcriptional repression of miR-34c in BT-ICs by reducing DNA binding activities of Sp1. Therefore, miR-34c reduction in BT-ICs induced by a single hypermethylated CpG site in the promoter region promotes self-renewal and epithelial-mesenchymal transition of BT-ICs.. Tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs), a subpopulation of cancer cells with stem cell-like properties, are related to tumor relapse and metastasis. Our previous studies identified a distinct profile of microRNA (miRNA) expression in breast T-ICs (BT-ICs), and the dysregulated miRNAs contribute to the self-renewal and tumorigenesis of these cells. However, the underlying mechanisms for miRNA dysregulation in BT-ICs remain obscure. In the present study, we demonstrated that the expression and function of miR-34c were reduced in the BT-ICs of MCF-7 and SK-3rd cells, a breast cancer cell line enriched for BT-ICs. Ectopic expression of miR-34c reduced the self-renewal of BT-ICs, inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and suppressed migration of the tumor cells via silencing target gene Notch4. Furthermore, we identified a single hypermethylated CpG site in the promoter region of miR-34c gene that contributed to transcriptional repression of miR-34c in BT-ICs by reducing DNA binding activities of Sp1. Therefore, miR-34c reduction in BT-ICs induced by a single hypermethylated CpG site in the promoter region promotes self-renewal and epithelial-mesenchymal transition of BT-ICs.

The incidence of solid tumors is low in individuals with Down syndrome (trisomy 21), suggesting the presence of one or more tumor suppressor genes on chromosome 21. Consistent with this finding, previous work has demonstrated frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of a small (< 5 Mb) region of chromosome 21, particularly in breast cancer, indicating that a tumor suppressor gene(s) may be located in this region. We investigated the expression of BTG3, a gene in the LOH region on chromosome 21, in breast cancer cell lines. BTG3 has been shown to be a negative regulator of SRC tyrosine kinase, and BTG3 is a target of p53 and inhibits the activity of the E2F1 transcription factor. Here we demonstrate that in a wide variety of human breast cancer cell lines, BTG3 expression is markedly reduced in the absence of detectable mutations in the BTG3 promoter and coding region. In these cell lines, the promoter region of the BTG3 gene is hypermethylated when compared to normal breast cell lines. BTG3 gene expression can be restored by treatment with 5'-aza-deoxycytidine, an inhibitor of DNA methylation. These data support the hypothesis that BTG3 may act to suppress tumorigenesis and that hypermethylation is an important mechanism for inactivation of BTG3 and perhaps other tumor suppressor genes. The findings are consistent with a role for an additional copy of BTG3 in the reduced incidence of breast cancer in individuals with Down syndrome.. The incidence of solid tumors is low in individuals with Down syndrome (trisomy 21), suggesting the presence of one or more tumor suppressor genes on chromosome 21. Consistent with this finding, previous work has demonstrated frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of a small (< 5 Mb) region of chromosome 21, particularly in breast cancer, indicating that a tumor suppressor gene(s) may be located in this region. We investigated the expression of BTG3, a gene in the LOH region on chromosome 21, in breast cancer cell lines. BTG3 has been shown to be a negative regulator of SRC tyrosine kinase, and BTG3 is a target of p53 and inhibits the activity of the E2F1 transcription factor. Here we demonstrate that in a wide variety of human breast cancer cell lines, BTG3 expression is markedly reduced in the absence of detectable mutations in the BTG3 promoter and coding region. In these cell lines, the promoter region of the BTG3 gene is hypermethylated when compared to normal breast cell lines. BTG3 gene expression can be restored by treatment with 5'-aza-deoxycytidine, an inhibitor of DNA methylation. These data support the hypothesis that BTG3 may act to suppress tumorigenesis and that hypermethylation is an important mechanism for inactivation of BTG3 and perhaps other tumor suppressor genes. The findings are consistent with a role for an additional copy of BTG3 in the reduced incidence of breast cancer in individuals with Down syndrome.

EZH2, the catalytic subunit of polycomb repressor complex 2, has oncogenic properties, whereas RASSF2A, a Ras association domain family protein, has a tumor suppressor role in many types of human cancer. However, the interrelationship between these two genes remains unclear. Here, we showed that the downregulation of EZH2 reduces CpG island methylation of the RASSF2A promoter, thereby leading to increased RASSF2A expression. Our findings also showed that knockdown of EZH2 increased RASSF2A expression in the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 in cooperation with DNMT1. This was similar to the effect of 5-Aza-CdR, a DNA methylation inhibitor that reactivates tumor suppressor genes and activated RASSF2A expression in our study. The EZH2 inhibitor DZNep markedly suppressed the proliferation, migration, and invasion of MCF-7 cells treated with ADR and TAM. EZH2 inhibits the expression of tumor suppressor gene RASSF2A via promoter hypermethylation. Thus, it plays an important role in tumorigenesis and is a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer.. EZH2, the catalytic subunit of polycomb repressor complex 2, has oncogenic properties, whereas RASSF2A, a Ras association domain family protein, has a tumor suppressor role in many types of human cancer. However, the interrelationship between these two genes remains unclear. Here, we showed that the downregulation of EZH2 reduces CpG island methylation of the RASSF2A promoter, thereby leading to increased RASSF2A expression. Our findings also showed that knockdown of EZH2 increased RASSF2A expression in the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 in cooperation with DNMT1. This was similar to the effect of 5-Aza-CdR, a DNA methylation inhibitor that reactivates tumor suppressor genes and activated RASSF2A expression in our study. The EZH2 inhibitor DZNep markedly suppressed the proliferation, migration, and invasion of MCF-7 cells treated with ADR and TAM. EZH2 inhibits the expression of tumor suppressor gene RASSF2A via promoter hypermethylation. Thus, it plays an important role in tumorigenesis and is a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of breast cancer.

To escape the immune system, tumor cells may remove surface molecules such as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and co-stimulatory molecules, which are essential for recognition by lymphocytes. Down-regulation of the co-stimulatory molecules CD70 (TNFSF7) and CD80 may contribute to tumor cell survival; however, the mechanism of down-regulation of the TNFSF7 gene during tumorigenesis is poorly understood. Here we present evidence indicating that TNFSF7 gene expression is epigenetically down-regulated via DNA hypermethylation within its promoter region during progression in breast cancer cells in the isogenic MCF10 model. Bisulfite sequencing revealed that the CpG pairs at the proximal region of the TNFSF7 promoter are heavily methylated during progression of breast cancer cells but that methylation of the more distal sequences was not changed considerably. Thus, this epigenetic silencing of the TNFSF7 gene via hypermethylation of its proximal region may allow the benign and invasive MCF10 variants to escape immune surveillance.. To escape the immune system, tumor cells may remove surface molecules such as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and co-stimulatory molecules, which are essential for recognition by lymphocytes. Down-regulation of the co-stimulatory molecules CD70 (TNFSF7) and CD80 may contribute to tumor cell survival; however, the mechanism of down-regulation of the TNFSF7 gene during tumorigenesis is poorly understood. Here we present evidence indicating that TNFSF7 gene expression is epigenetically down-regulated via DNA hypermethylation within its promoter region during progression in breast cancer cells in the isogenic MCF10 model. Bisulfite sequencing revealed that the CpG pairs at the proximal region of the TNFSF7 promoter are heavily methylated during progression of breast cancer cells but that methylation of the more distal sequences was not changed considerably. Thus, this epigenetic silencing of the TNFSF7 gene via hypermethylation of its proximal region may allow the benign and invasive MCF10 variants to escape immune surveillance.

ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene that maps to a site on chromosome 1p31 where loss of heterozygosity has been observed in 40% of human breast and ovarian cancers. ARHI is expressed in normal ovarian and breast epithelial cells, but ARHI expression is lost in a majority of ovarian and breast cancers. Expression of ARHI from the paternal allele can be down-regulated by multiple mechanisms in addition to loss of heterozygosity. This article explores the role of DNA methylation in silencing ARHI expression. There are three CpG islands in the ARHI gene. CpG islands I and II are located in the promoter region, whereas CpG island III is located in the coding region. Consistent with imprinting, we have found that all three CpG islands were partially methylated in normal human breast epithelial cells. Additional confirmation of imprinting has been obtained by studying DNA methylation and ARHI expression in murine A9 cells that carry either the maternal or the paternal copy of human chromosome 1. All three CpG islands were methylated, and ARHI was not expressed in A9 cells that contained the maternal allele. Conversely, CpG islands were not methylated and ARHI was expressed in A9 cells that contained the paternal allele of human chromosome 1. Aberrant methylation was found in several breast cancer cell lines that exhibited decreased ARHI expression. Hypermethylation was detected in 67% (6 of 9) of breast cancer cell lines at CpG island I, 33% (3 of 9) at CpG island II, and 56% (5 of 9) at CpG island III. Hypomethylation was observed in 44% (4 of 9) of breast cancer cell lines at CpG island II. When methylation of CpG islands was studied in 20 surgical specimens, hypermethylation was not observed in CpG island I, but 3 of 20 cases exhibited hypermethylation in CpG island II (15%), and 4 of 20 cases had hypermethylation in CpG island III (20%). Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a methyltransferase inhibitor, could reverse aberrant hypermethylation of CpG island I, II and III and partially restore ARHI expression in some, but not all of the cell lines. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine partially reactivated ARHI expression in cell lines with hypermethylation of CpG islands I and II but not in cell lines with partial methylation or hypomethylation of these CpG islands. To test the impact of CpG island methylation on ARHI promoter activity more directly, constructs were prepared with the ARHI promoter linked to a luciferase reporter and transfected into SKBr3 and human embryo kidney 293 cells. Methylation of the entire construct destroyed promoter activity. Selective methylation of CpG island II alone or in combination with CpG island I also abolished ARHI promoter activity. Methylation of CpG I alone partially inhibited promoter activity of ARHI. Thus, hypermethylation of CpG island II in the promoter region of ARHI is associated with the complete loss of ARHI expression in breast cancer cells. Other epigenetic modifications such as hypermethylation in CpG island III may also contribute to the loss of ARHI expression.. ARHI is a maternally imprinted tumor suppressor gene that maps to a site on chromosome 1p31 where loss of heterozygosity has been observed in 40% of human breast and ovarian cancers. ARHI is expressed in normal ovarian and breast epithelial cells, but ARHI expression is lost in a majority of ovarian and breast cancers. Expression of ARHI from the paternal allele can be down-regulated by multiple mechanisms in addition to loss of heterozygosity. This article explores the role of DNA methylation in silencing ARHI expression. There are three CpG islands in the ARHI gene. CpG islands I and II are located in the promoter region, whereas CpG island III is located in the coding region. Consistent with imprinting, we have found that all three CpG islands were partially methylated in normal human breast epithelial cells. Additional confirmation of imprinting has been obtained by studying DNA methylation and ARHI expression in murine A9 cells that carry either the maternal or the paternal copy of human chromosome 1. All three CpG islands were methylated, and ARHI was not expressed in A9 cells that contained the maternal allele. Conversely, CpG islands were not methylated and ARHI was expressed in A9 cells that contained the paternal allele of human chromosome 1. Aberrant methylation was found in several breast cancer cell lines that exhibited decreased ARHI expression. Hypermethylation was detected in 67% (6 of 9) of breast cancer cell lines at CpG island I, 33% (3 of 9) at CpG island II, and 56% (5 of 9) at CpG island III. Hypomethylation was observed in 44% (4 of 9) of breast cancer cell lines at CpG island II. When methylation of CpG islands was studied in 20 surgical specimens, hypermethylation was not observed in CpG island I, but 3 of 20 cases exhibited hypermethylation in CpG island II (15%), and 4 of 20 cases had hypermethylation in CpG island III (20%). Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a methyltransferase inhibitor, could reverse aberrant hypermethylation of CpG island I, II and III and partially restore ARHI expression in some, but not all of the cell lines. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine partially reactivated ARHI expression in cell lines with hypermethylation of CpG islands I and II but not in cell lines with partial methylation or hypomethylation of these CpG islands. To test the impact of CpG island methylation on ARHI promoter activity more directly, constructs were prepared with the ARHI promoter linked to a luciferase reporter and transfected into SKBr3 and human embryo kidney 293 cells. Methylation of the entire construct destroyed promoter activity. Selective methylation of CpG island II alone or in combination with CpG island I also abolished ARHI promoter activity. Methylation of CpG I alone partially inhibited promoter activity of ARHI. Thus, hypermethylation of CpG island II in the promoter region of ARHI is associated with the complete loss of ARHI expression in breast cancer cells. Other epigenetic modifications such as hypermethylation in CpG island III may also contribute to the loss of ARHI expression.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of hypermethylation of BRCA1 and APC gene promoters with the response to anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer. METHODS: One hundred and forty patients with primary breast cancer received anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and pretreatment hypermethylation status of BRCA1 and APC genes promoters was detected by methylation-specific PCR. RESULTS: Of the 140 patients, 30 (21.4%) achieved pathological complete response (pCR), and methylation rates of BRCA1 and APC gene promoters were 21.4% (30/140) and 18.3% (24/131), respectively. Among the 110 patients with unmethylated BRCA1 gene, 28 (25.5%) achieved pCR, while in the 30 patients with methylated BRCA1 gene, only 2 (6.7%) had a pCR, with a significant difference between the two groups (chi(2) = 4.94, P = 0.026). However, no statistically significant correlation was found between the methylation of APC gene and pCR to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in this cohort of patients (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: Primary breast cancer with an unmethylated BRCA1 gene is prone to achieve a pathological complete response to anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy than those with a methylated BRCA1 gene. BRCA1 methylation status may be a useful predictor for anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer patients.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of hypermethylation of BRCA1 and APC gene promoters with the response to anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer. METHODS: One hundred and forty patients with primary breast cancer received anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and pretreatment hypermethylation status of BRCA1 and APC genes promoters was detected by methylation-specific PCR. RESULTS: Of the 140 patients, 30 (21.4%) achieved pathological complete response (pCR), and methylation rates of BRCA1 and APC gene promoters were 21.4% (30/140) and 18.3% (24/131), respectively. Among the 110 patients with unmethylated BRCA1 gene, 28 (25.5%) achieved pCR, while in the 30 patients with methylated BRCA1 gene, only 2 (6.7%) had a pCR, with a significant difference between the two groups (chi(2) = 4.94, P = 0.026). However, no statistically significant correlation was found between the methylation of APC gene and pCR to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in this cohort of patients (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: Primary breast cancer with an unmethylated BRCA1 gene is prone to achieve a pathological complete response to anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy than those with a methylated BRCA1 gene. BRCA1 methylation status may be a useful predictor for anthracycline-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer patients.

The gene product of spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) has been implicated in the suppression of breast cancer invasion. We previously reported that SYK expression is lost in a subset of breast cancer; primarily by methylation-mediated gene silencing. In our study, we explored the possibility of using a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA), to suppress breast cancer cell invasion by restoring SYK expression. We found that AZA treatment reestablished the expression of SYK(L) that was accompanied by suppression of the invasion capacity of SYK-negative cells. This invasion inhibition was not due to global cellular toxicity since this treatment did not affect overall cell proliferation. This decreased invasiveness by AZA treatment was diminished by piceatannol, a SYK inhibitor, suggesting that SYK play a significant role in AZA-inducible invasion suppression. SYK promoter hypermethylation was found infrequent in pathologically normal mammary tissues or benign lesions (<5%). In contrast, SYK methylation was frequently identified in ductal carcinoma in situ ( approximately 45%) and invasive ductal carcinoma (47% in node-negative and 40% in node-positive cases), indicating that the hypermethylation of SYK occurs at a stage prior to the development of invasion phenotypes. All these results suggested a potential use of SYK methylation as a valuable biomarker to detect early cancerous lesions and support the use of AZA as a new reagent to the management of advanced breast cancer.. The gene product of spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) has been implicated in the suppression of breast cancer invasion. We previously reported that SYK expression is lost in a subset of breast cancer; primarily by methylation-mediated gene silencing. In our study, we explored the possibility of using a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA), to suppress breast cancer cell invasion by restoring SYK expression. We found that AZA treatment reestablished the expression of SYK(L) that was accompanied by suppression of the invasion capacity of SYK-negative cells. This invasion inhibition was not due to global cellular toxicity since this treatment did not affect overall cell proliferation. This decreased invasiveness by AZA treatment was diminished by piceatannol, a SYK inhibitor, suggesting that SYK play a significant role in AZA-inducible invasion suppression. SYK promoter hypermethylation was found infrequent in pathologically normal mammary tissues or benign lesions (<5%). In contrast, SYK methylation was frequently identified in ductal carcinoma in situ ( approximately 45%) and invasive ductal carcinoma (47% in node-negative and 40% in node-positive cases), indicating that the hypermethylation of SYK occurs at a stage prior to the development of invasion phenotypes. All these results suggested a potential use of SYK methylation as a valuable biomarker to detect early cancerous lesions and support the use of AZA as a new reagent to the management of advanced breast cancer.

Deregulation of msh homeobox 1 (MSX1) has been identified to be associated with multiple human malignant neoplasms. However, the association of the expression and biological function of MSX1 with breast tumorigenesis, and the underlying mechanism remain largely unknown. Therefore, the present study examined the expression and promoter methylation of MSX1 in breast tumor cell lines, primary breast tumors and normal breast tissues using semi-quantitative, quantitative and methylation-specific reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction. Colony formation assays, flow cytometric analysis, and wound healing and Transwell assays were used to assess various functions of MSX1. Western blot analyses were also conducted to explore the mechanism of MSX1. The results revealed that MSX1 was broadly expressed in normal human tissues, including breast tissues, but was frequently downregulated or silenced in breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors by promoter methylation. Methylation of the MSX1 promoter was observed in 7/9 (77.8%) breast cancer cell lines and 47/99 (47.5%) primary tumors, but not in normal breast tissues or surgical margin tissues, suggesting that tumor-specific methylation of MSX1 occurs in breast cancer. Pharmacological demethylation reduced MSX1 promoter methylation levels and restored the expression of MSX1. The ectopic expression of MSX1, induced by transfection with a lentiviral vector, significantly inhibited the clonogenicity, proliferation, migration and invasion of breast tumor cells by inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Ectopic MSX1 expression also inhibited the expression of active beta-catenin and its downstream targets c-Myc and cyclin D1, and also increased the cleavage of caspase-3 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. In conclusion, MSX1 exerts tumor-suppressive functions by inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in breast tumorigenesis. Its methylation may be used as an epigenetic biomarker for the early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer.. Deregulation of msh homeobox 1 (MSX1) has been identified to be associated with multiple human malignant neoplasms. However, the association of the expression and biological function of MSX1 with breast tumorigenesis, and the underlying mechanism remain largely unknown. Therefore, the present study examined the expression and promoter methylation of MSX1 in breast tumor cell lines, primary breast tumors and normal breast tissues using semi-quantitative, quantitative and methylation-specific reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction. Colony formation assays, flow cytometric analysis, and wound healing and Transwell assays were used to assess various functions of MSX1. Western blot analyses were also conducted to explore the mechanism of MSX1. The results revealed that MSX1 was broadly expressed in normal human tissues, including breast tissues, but was frequently downregulated or silenced in breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors by promoter methylation. Methylation of the MSX1 promoter was observed in 7/9 (77.8%) breast cancer cell lines and 47/99 (47.5%) primary tumors, but not in normal breast tissues or surgical margin tissues, suggesting that tumor-specific methylation of MSX1 occurs in breast cancer. Pharmacological demethylation reduced MSX1 promoter methylation levels and restored the expression of MSX1. The ectopic expression of MSX1, induced by transfection with a lentiviral vector, significantly inhibited the clonogenicity, proliferation, migration and invasion of breast tumor cells by inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Ectopic MSX1 expression also inhibited the expression of active beta-catenin and its downstream targets c-Myc and cyclin D1, and also increased the cleavage of caspase-3 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. In conclusion, MSX1 exerts tumor-suppressive functions by inducing G1/S cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in breast tumorigenesis. Its methylation may be used as an epigenetic biomarker for the early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND: Fragile histidine triad (FHIT) gene is a tumor suppressor gene which involved in breast cancer pathogenesis. Epigenetics alterations in FHIT contributes to tumorigenesis of breast cancer. OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to study FHIT promoter region hypermethylation in Egyptian breast cancer patients and its association with clinicopathological features. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to study the hypermethylation of FHIT promoter region in 20 benign breast tissues and 30 breast cancer tissues. RESULTS: The frequency of hypermethylation of FHIT promoter region was significantly increased in breast cancer patients compared to bengin breast disease patients. The Odd ?s ratio (95%CI) of development of breast cancer in individuals with FHIT promoter hypermethylation (MM) was 11.0 (1.22-250.8). There were also significant associations between FHIT promoter hypermethylation and estrogen, progesterone receptors negativity, tumor stage and nodal involvment in breast cancer pateints. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support an association between FHIT promotor hypermethylation and development of breast cancer in Egyptian breast cancer patients. FHIT promoter hypermethylation is associated with some poor prognostic features of breast cancer.. BACKGROUND: Fragile histidine triad (FHIT) gene is a tumor suppressor gene which involved in breast cancer pathogenesis. Epigenetics alterations in FHIT contributes to tumorigenesis of breast cancer. OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to study FHIT promoter region hypermethylation in Egyptian breast cancer patients and its association with clinicopathological features. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed to study the hypermethylation of FHIT promoter region in 20 benign breast tissues and 30 breast cancer tissues. RESULTS: The frequency of hypermethylation of FHIT promoter region was significantly increased in breast cancer patients compared to bengin breast disease patients. The Odd ?s ratio (95%CI) of development of breast cancer in individuals with FHIT promoter hypermethylation (MM) was 11.0 (1.22-250.8). There were also significant associations between FHIT promoter hypermethylation and estrogen, progesterone receptors negativity, tumor stage and nodal involvment in breast cancer pateints. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support an association between FHIT promotor hypermethylation and development of breast cancer in Egyptian breast cancer patients. FHIT promoter hypermethylation is associated with some poor prognostic features of breast cancer.

Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide. Although extensive studies are ongoing concerning its intricate molecular mechanisms, development of novel therapies and more accurate diagnostic and prognostic approaches is still a challenge. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) enables the invasion of metastatic cancer cells and has recently been highlighted in a Cancer Stem Cell (CSC) model of BC. Epigenetic events as well as miRNA expression are the master regulators of tumorigenesis and add a further layer to the complexity of BC pathogenesis. The miRNAs are related to epigenetic event and additionally affect epigenetic pathways. Recent evidence demonstrates that epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation may control miRNA expression. Because each miRNA may regulate several target genes, dysregulation of miRNA caused by aberrant DNA methylation patterns of the locus may influence important downstream pathways. Furthermore, some miRNAs is believed to regulate important DNA methylator factors. Any disruption or modification of this intricate network can contribute to the disease process; thus, it is essential to understand these changes. Advancements in new sequencing technologies to detect DNA methylation patterns has provided the opportunity to determine differentially methylated regions (DMRs) of the miRNA locus and their effect on expression profiles to improve BC diagnosis and treatment. The current review examines the interplay of DNA methylation mechanisms and miRNA function in invasive tumorigenesis, specifically EMT and CSC of BC, to highlight its potential for advancements on BC etiology, diagnosis, and therapy.. Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide. Although extensive studies are ongoing concerning its intricate molecular mechanisms, development of novel therapies and more accurate diagnostic and prognostic approaches is still a challenge. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) enables the invasion of metastatic cancer cells and has recently been highlighted in a Cancer Stem Cell (CSC) model of BC. Epigenetic events as well as miRNA expression are the master regulators of tumorigenesis and add a further layer to the complexity of BC pathogenesis. The miRNAs are related to epigenetic event and additionally affect epigenetic pathways. Recent evidence demonstrates that epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation may control miRNA expression. Because each miRNA may regulate several target genes, dysregulation of miRNA caused by aberrant DNA methylation patterns of the locus may influence important downstream pathways. Furthermore, some miRNAs is believed to regulate important DNA methylator factors. Any disruption or modification of this intricate network can contribute to the disease process; thus, it is essential to understand these changes. Advancements in new sequencing technologies to detect DNA methylation patterns has provided the opportunity to determine differentially methylated regions (DMRs) of the miRNA locus and their effect on expression profiles to improve BC diagnosis and treatment. The current review examines the interplay of DNA methylation mechanisms and miRNA function in invasive tumorigenesis, specifically EMT and CSC of BC, to highlight its potential for advancements on BC etiology, diagnosis, and therapy.

Multiplex methylation-sensitive PCR was employed in studying the methylation of CpG islands in the RB1, p16/CDKN2A, p15/CDKN2B, p14/ARF, CDH1, MGMT, HIC1, and N33 promoter regions in breast carcinoma (105 tumors). Methylation was often observed for the two major suppressor genes involved in cell-cycle control through the Cdk-Rb-E2F signaling pathway, RB1 (18/105, 17%) and p16 (59/105, 56%); both genes were methylated in 13 tumors. Methylation involved p15 in two (2%) tumors; CDH1, in 83 (79%) tumors; MGMT, in eight (8%) tumors, and N33, in nine (9%) tumors. The p14 promoter was not methylated in the tumors examined.. Multiplex methylation-sensitive PCR was employed in studying the methylation of CpG islands in the RB1, p16/CDKN2A, p15/CDKN2B, p14/ARF, CDH1, MGMT, HIC1, and N33 promoter regions in breast carcinoma (105 tumors). Methylation was often observed for the two major suppressor genes involved in cell-cycle control through the Cdk-Rb-E2F signaling pathway, RB1 (18/105, 17%) and p16 (59/105, 56%); both genes were methylated in 13 tumors. Methylation involved p15 in two (2%) tumors; CDH1, in 83 (79%) tumors; MGMT, in eight (8%) tumors, and N33, in nine (9%) tumors. The p14 promoter was not methylated in the tumors examined.

The study was conducted to determine the effect of physical activity on DNA methylation and to predict the consequence of this effect concerning gene expression and breast cancer survival. Blood samples, collected from 12 breast cancer patients who participated in a randomized clinical trial of exercise, were examined for exercise-related changes in DNA methylation using a methylation microarray. Tumor samples of 348 breast cancer patients were analyzed with qRT-PCR and qMSP to determine gene expression and methylation identified in the microarray analysis. Cox regression models were developed to predict survival outcomes in association with gene expression and methylation. After 6 months of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise, changes in DNA methylation (P < 5 x 10(-5)) in peripheral blood leukocytes were detected in 43 genes from a panel of 14 495. Based on the list, we analyzed gene expression in association with overall survival in breast tumors and found three genes whose methylation was reduced after exercise were favorably in association with overall survival, i.e., higher expression associated with better survival. Of the three genes, L3MBTL1 was a putative tumor suppressor gene with known function to repress chromatin for transcription, which is activated mainly in germline stem cells. Further analyses of tumor features among patients indicated that high expression of L3MBTL1 was associated with low grade and hormone receptor-positive tumors, as well as low risk of disease recurrence and breast cancer death. In conclusion, the study suggests that increasing physical activity after a breast cancer diagnosis may affect epigenetic regulation of tumor suppressor genes, which have favorable impacts on survival outcomes of breast cancer patients.. The study was conducted to determine the effect of physical activity on DNA methylation and to predict the consequence of this effect concerning gene expression and breast cancer survival. Blood samples, collected from 12 breast cancer patients who participated in a randomized clinical trial of exercise, were examined for exercise-related changes in DNA methylation using a methylation microarray. Tumor samples of 348 breast cancer patients were analyzed with qRT-PCR and qMSP to determine gene expression and methylation identified in the microarray analysis. Cox regression models were developed to predict survival outcomes in association with gene expression and methylation. After 6 months of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise, changes in DNA methylation (P < 5 x 10(-5)) in peripheral blood leukocytes were detected in 43 genes from a panel of 14 495. Based on the list, we analyzed gene expression in association with overall survival in breast tumors and found three genes whose methylation was reduced after exercise were favorably in association with overall survival, i.e., higher expression associated with better survival. Of the three genes, L3MBTL1 was a putative tumor suppressor gene with known function to repress chromatin for transcription, which is activated mainly in germline stem cells. Further analyses of tumor features among patients indicated that high expression of L3MBTL1 was associated with low grade and hormone receptor-positive tumors, as well as low risk of disease recurrence and breast cancer death. In conclusion, the study suggests that increasing physical activity after a breast cancer diagnosis may affect epigenetic regulation of tumor suppressor genes, which have favorable impacts on survival outcomes of breast cancer patients.

Although systematic studies have identified a host of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) which are involved in breast cancer, the knowledge about the methyla-tion-mediated dysregulation of those lncRNAs remains limited. Here, we integrated multi-omics data to analyze the methylated alteration of lncRNAs in breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA). We found that lncRNAs showed diverse methylation patterns on promoter regions in BRCA. LncRNAs were divided into two categories and four subcategories based on their promoter methylation patterns and expression levels be-tween tumor and normal samples. Through cis-regulatory analysis and gene ontology network, abnormally methylated lncRNAs were identified to be associated with can-cer regulation, proliferation or expression of transcription factors. Competing endog-enous RNA network and functional enrichment analysis of abnormally methylated lncRNAs showed that lncRNAs with different methylation patterns were involved in several hallmarks and KEGG pathways of cancers significantly. Finally, survival analysis based on mRNA modules in networks revealed that lncRNAs silenced by high methylation were associated with prognosis significantly in BRCA. This study enhances the understanding of aberrantly methylated patterns of lncRNAs and pro-vides a novel insight for identifying cancer biomarkers and potential therapeutic tar-gets in breast cancer.. Although systematic studies have identified a host of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) which are involved in breast cancer, the knowledge about the methyla-tion-mediated dysregulation of those lncRNAs remains limited. Here, we integrated multi-omics data to analyze the methylated alteration of lncRNAs in breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA). We found that lncRNAs showed diverse methylation patterns on promoter regions in BRCA. LncRNAs were divided into two categories and four subcategories based on their promoter methylation patterns and expression levels be-tween tumor and normal samples. Through cis-regulatory analysis and gene ontology network, abnormally methylated lncRNAs were identified to be associated with can-cer regulation, proliferation or expression of transcription factors. Competing endog-enous RNA network and functional enrichment analysis of abnormally methylated lncRNAs showed that lncRNAs with different methylation patterns were involved in several hallmarks and KEGG pathways of cancers significantly. Finally, survival analysis based on mRNA modules in networks revealed that lncRNAs silenced by high methylation were associated with prognosis significantly in BRCA. This study enhances the understanding of aberrantly methylated patterns of lncRNAs and pro-vides a novel insight for identifying cancer biomarkers and potential therapeutic tar-gets in breast cancer.

Exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia increases the percentage of breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs), which are required for tumor initiation and metastasis, and this response is dependent on the activity of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs). We previously reported that exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia induces the ALKBH5-mediated demethylation of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) in NANOG mRNA leading to increased expression of NANOG, which is a pluripotency factor that promotes BCSC specification. Here we report that exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia also induces ZNF217-dependent inhibition of m6A methylation of mRNAs encoding NANOG and KLF4, which is another pluripotency factor that mediates BCSC specification. Although hypoxia induced the BCSC phenotype in all breast-cancer cell lines analyzed, it did so through variable induction of pluripotency factors and ALKBH5 or ZNF217. However, in every breast cancer line, the hypoxic induction of pluripotency factor and ALKBH5 or ZNF217 expression was HIF-dependent. Immunohistochemistry revealed that expression of HIF-1alpha and ALKBH5 was concordant in all human breast cancer biopsies analyzed. ALKBH5 knockdown in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells significantly decreased metastasis from breast to lungs in immunodeficient mice. Thus, HIFs stimulate pluripotency factor expression and BCSC specification by negative regulation of RNA methylation.. Exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia increases the percentage of breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs), which are required for tumor initiation and metastasis, and this response is dependent on the activity of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs). We previously reported that exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia induces the ALKBH5-mediated demethylation of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) in NANOG mRNA leading to increased expression of NANOG, which is a pluripotency factor that promotes BCSC specification. Here we report that exposure of breast cancer cells to hypoxia also induces ZNF217-dependent inhibition of m6A methylation of mRNAs encoding NANOG and KLF4, which is another pluripotency factor that mediates BCSC specification. Although hypoxia induced the BCSC phenotype in all breast-cancer cell lines analyzed, it did so through variable induction of pluripotency factors and ALKBH5 or ZNF217. However, in every breast cancer line, the hypoxic induction of pluripotency factor and ALKBH5 or ZNF217 expression was HIF-dependent. Immunohistochemistry revealed that expression of HIF-1alpha and ALKBH5 was concordant in all human breast cancer biopsies analyzed. ALKBH5 knockdown in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells significantly decreased metastasis from breast to lungs in immunodeficient mice. Thus, HIFs stimulate pluripotency factor expression and BCSC specification by negative regulation of RNA methylation.

Objective: To understand the relationship between AOX1, IRF4 gene methylation status in peripheral blood leukocyte DNA, as well as its interaction with environmental factors, and the risk of breast cancer. Methods: A case-control study was conducted among 401 breast cancer patients and 555 cancer-free controls selected from 2010 to 2014. Methylation sensitive-high resolution melting curve analysis was used to detect the methylation status of AOX1 and IRF4. The multiplication interaction effect between genes' methylation and environmental factors on the risk of breast cancer was analyzed by using unconditional logistic regression, and Excel software was used to analyze the additive interaction effect. Results: Individuals without AOX1 methylation had a 1.37-fold (95%CI: 1.02-1.84) higher breast cancer risk compared to individuals with AOX1 methylation. AOX1 methylation interacted with fungi intake (OR=2.06, 95%CI: 1.12-3.79) and physical activity (OR=2.18, 95%CI: 1.16-4.09) synergistically, on the risk for breast cancer, but no additive interaction effects were observed. Non-methylation of IRF4 could increase the risk for breast cancer, with statistical significance (OR=1.71, 95%CI: 0.99-7.43). Neither multiplication nor additive interactions were observed between IRF4 methylation and environmental factors. Conclusion: Non-methylation of AOX1 and IRF4 were a risk factors for breast cancer.. Objective: To understand the relationship between AOX1, IRF4 gene methylation status in peripheral blood leukocyte DNA, as well as its interaction with environmental factors, and the risk of breast cancer. Methods: A case-control study was conducted among 401 breast cancer patients and 555 cancer-free controls selected from 2010 to 2014. Methylation sensitive-high resolution melting curve analysis was used to detect the methylation status of AOX1 and IRF4. The multiplication interaction effect between genes' methylation and environmental factors on the risk of breast cancer was analyzed by using unconditional logistic regression, and Excel software was used to analyze the additive interaction effect. Results: Individuals without AOX1 methylation had a 1.37-fold (95%CI: 1.02-1.84) higher breast cancer risk compared to individuals with AOX1 methylation. AOX1 methylation interacted with fungi intake (OR=2.06, 95%CI: 1.12-3.79) and physical activity (OR=2.18, 95%CI: 1.16-4.09) synergistically, on the risk for breast cancer, but no additive interaction effects were observed. Non-methylation of IRF4 could increase the risk for breast cancer, with statistical significance (OR=1.71, 95%CI: 0.99-7.43). Neither multiplication nor additive interactions were observed between IRF4 methylation and environmental factors. Conclusion: Non-methylation of AOX1 and IRF4 were a risk factors for breast cancer.

The tumor suppressor gene, PTEN, has previously been demonstrated to be involved in breast tumorigenesis and tumor progression. The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression and significance of PTEN in breast carcinomas, to detect the mutation frequency of PTEN in sporadic breast carcinoma tissues and to determine the association between PTEN promoter methylation and gene expression. Immunohistochemical methods were used to analyze the expression of the PTEN gene in 146 cases of breast carcinoma and 10 cases of normal breast tissue closely adjacent to the carcinoma. Polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis was used to analyze conformation polymorphisms in 45 breast carcinoma and 10 normal breast tissues. Point mutations of abnormal single stranded conformation were detected by DNA sequencing. The methylation of the PTEN promoter was analyzed by methylation-specific PCR. Expression of PTEN was detected in 57.5% (84/146) of patients with breast carcinoma. By contrast, PTEN expression was detected in 100% of normal samples. Expression of PTEN was found to negatively correlate with the tumor size, the pathological stage and the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) and the progesterone receptor (PR) in breast cancer. The 2-year disease-free survival of patients with a high expression of PTEN was higher compared with those with low PTEN expression (P<0.05). Missense mutations in exon 2 of PTEN were identified in 1/45 breast cancer cases. PTEN promoter methylation was detected in 31.1% (14/45) of breast carcinomas, of which 64.3% (9/14) were associated with a loss of PTEN expression. The tumor suppressor gene, PTEN, was abnormally expressed in the breast carcinomas. The number of PTEN mutations were low (1/45) in the sporadic breast cancer cases analyzed in the present study and PTEN promoter methylation may have been the main mechanism leading to the decreased expression of PTEN. These results indicate that PTEN is important for the tumorigenesis, development and prognosis of breast cancer.. The tumor suppressor gene, PTEN, has previously been demonstrated to be involved in breast tumorigenesis and tumor progression. The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression and significance of PTEN in breast carcinomas, to detect the mutation frequency of PTEN in sporadic breast carcinoma tissues and to determine the association between PTEN promoter methylation and gene expression. Immunohistochemical methods were used to analyze the expression of the PTEN gene in 146 cases of breast carcinoma and 10 cases of normal breast tissue closely adjacent to the carcinoma. Polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis was used to analyze conformation polymorphisms in 45 breast carcinoma and 10 normal breast tissues. Point mutations of abnormal single stranded conformation were detected by DNA sequencing. The methylation of the PTEN promoter was analyzed by methylation-specific PCR. Expression of PTEN was detected in 57.5% (84/146) of patients with breast carcinoma. By contrast, PTEN expression was detected in 100% of normal samples. Expression of PTEN was found to negatively correlate with the tumor size, the pathological stage and the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) and the progesterone receptor (PR) in breast cancer. The 2-year disease-free survival of patients with a high expression of PTEN was higher compared with those with low PTEN expression (P<0.05). Missense mutations in exon 2 of PTEN were identified in 1/45 breast cancer cases. PTEN promoter methylation was detected in 31.1% (14/45) of breast carcinomas, of which 64.3% (9/14) were associated with a loss of PTEN expression. The tumor suppressor gene, PTEN, was abnormally expressed in the breast carcinomas. The number of PTEN mutations were low (1/45) in the sporadic breast cancer cases analyzed in the present study and PTEN promoter methylation may have been the main mechanism leading to the decreased expression of PTEN. These results indicate that PTEN is important for the tumorigenesis, development and prognosis of breast cancer.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Tropomyosin-2 (TPM2) plays important roles in functions of the cytoskeleton, such as cytokinesis, vesicle transport, cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis,and these functions imply that TPM2 also plays a role in cancer development. Indeed, it has been shown that TPM2 plays a critical role in some cancers. However, the role of TPM2 in breast cancer is still poorly characterized. Thus, we explored the role of TPM2 in breast cancer. METHODS: We analysed TPM2 expression and its correlation with the clinicopathological features in breast cancer. Then, we examined the influence of hypoxia on TPM2 expression and methylation status using bisulfite sequencing PCR. Furthermore, we performed TPM2-mediated migration and invasion assays in the context of hypoxia and examined changes in matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) expression. Finally, we detected the influence of TPM2 on survival and chemotherapy drug sensitivity. RESULTS: We found that TPM2 expression is down-regulated in breast cancer cells compared to that in normal breast cells. The data from TCGA supported these results. Promoter methylation of TPM2, which could be induced by hypoxia, was responsible for its low expression. Hypoxia might regulate cell invasiveness partly by TPM2 down-regulation-mediated changes of MMP2 expression. Importantly, low TPM2 expression was correlated with lymph node metastasis (P=0.031), tumour node metastasis stage (P=0.01), histological grade (P=0.037), and shorter overall survival (P=0.028). Univariate and multivariate analyses indicated that TPM2 was an independent predictor in breast cancer patients. Paclitaxel chemotherapy did not benefit patients with low TPM2 expression (P<0.0001). TPM2 knockdown significantly reduced cell sensitivity to paclitaxel. CONCLUSION: TPM2 is a potential novel tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer. TPM2 is associated with poor survival and chemoresistance to paclitaxel in breast cancer, and TPM2 may represent a promising therapeutic gene target for breast cancer patients with chemoresistance.. BACKGROUND/AIMS: Tropomyosin-2 (TPM2) plays important roles in functions of the cytoskeleton, such as cytokinesis, vesicle transport, cell proliferation, migration and apoptosis,and these functions imply that TPM2 also plays a role in cancer development. Indeed, it has been shown that TPM2 plays a critical role in some cancers. However, the role of TPM2 in breast cancer is still poorly characterized. Thus, we explored the role of TPM2 in breast cancer. METHODS: We analysed TPM2 expression and its correlation with the clinicopathological features in breast cancer. Then, we examined the influence of hypoxia on TPM2 expression and methylation status using bisulfite sequencing PCR. Furthermore, we performed TPM2-mediated migration and invasion assays in the context of hypoxia and examined changes in matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) expression. Finally, we detected the influence of TPM2 on survival and chemotherapy drug sensitivity. RESULTS: We found that TPM2 expression is down-regulated in breast cancer cells compared to that in normal breast cells. The data from TCGA supported these results. Promoter methylation of TPM2, which could be induced by hypoxia, was responsible for its low expression. Hypoxia might regulate cell invasiveness partly by TPM2 down-regulation-mediated changes of MMP2 expression. Importantly, low TPM2 expression was correlated with lymph node metastasis (P=0.031), tumour node metastasis stage (P=0.01), histological grade (P=0.037), and shorter overall survival (P=0.028). Univariate and multivariate analyses indicated that TPM2 was an independent predictor in breast cancer patients. Paclitaxel chemotherapy did not benefit patients with low TPM2 expression (P<0.0001). TPM2 knockdown significantly reduced cell sensitivity to paclitaxel. CONCLUSION: TPM2 is a potential novel tumour suppressor gene in breast cancer. TPM2 is associated with poor survival and chemoresistance to paclitaxel in breast cancer, and TPM2 may represent a promising therapeutic gene target for breast cancer patients with chemoresistance.

Histone lysine methylation regulates gene expression and cancer initiation. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that DOT1L, a histone H3-lysine79 (H3K79) methyltransferase, plays a potentially important role in breast cancer. DOT1L inhibition selectively inhibited proliferation, self-renewal, metastatic potential of breast cancer cells and induced cell differentiation. In addition, inhibitors of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH), such as neplanocin and 3-deazaneplanocin, also inhibited both H3K79 methylation and proliferation of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. The activity of SAHH inhibitors was previously attributed to inhibition of H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2. However, inhibition of EZH2 by a specific inhibitor did not contribute to cell death. SAHH inhibitors had only weak activity against H3K27 methylation and their activity is therefore mainly due to DOT1L/H3K79 methylation inhibition. Overall, we showed that DOT1L is a potential drug target for breast cancer.. Histone lysine methylation regulates gene expression and cancer initiation. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that DOT1L, a histone H3-lysine79 (H3K79) methyltransferase, plays a potentially important role in breast cancer. DOT1L inhibition selectively inhibited proliferation, self-renewal, metastatic potential of breast cancer cells and induced cell differentiation. In addition, inhibitors of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH), such as neplanocin and 3-deazaneplanocin, also inhibited both H3K79 methylation and proliferation of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. The activity of SAHH inhibitors was previously attributed to inhibition of H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2. However, inhibition of EZH2 by a specific inhibitor did not contribute to cell death. SAHH inhibitors had only weak activity against H3K27 methylation and their activity is therefore mainly due to DOT1L/H3K79 methylation inhibition. Overall, we showed that DOT1L is a potential drug target for breast cancer.

Breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) located at chromosome 17q12-21 is a classic tumor suppressor gene, and has been considered as a significant role in hereditary breast cancers. Moreover, numerous studies demonstrated the methylation status of CpG islands in the promoter regions of BRCA1 gene was aberrant in patients with sporadic breast tumors compared with healthy females or patients with benign diseases. However, these conclusions were not always consistent. Hence, a meta-analysis was performed to get a more precise estimate for these associations. Crude odds ratio with 95% confidence interval were used to assess the association of BRCA1 promoter methylation and the risk or clinicopathologic characteristics of breast cancers under fixed or random effect model. A total of 40 studies were eligible for this present study. We observed the frequency of BRCA1 promoter methylation was statistically significant higher in breast cancers than non-cancer controls. Furthermore, BRCA1 methylation was statistically associated with lymph node metastasis, histological grade 3, ER(-), PR(-), triple-negative phenotype, and decreased or lack levels of BRCA1 protein expression. In conclusion, this study indicated that BRCA1 promoter methylation appeared to be a useful predictive or prognostic biomarker for breast cancers in clinical assessment.. Breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) located at chromosome 17q12-21 is a classic tumor suppressor gene, and has been considered as a significant role in hereditary breast cancers. Moreover, numerous studies demonstrated the methylation status of CpG islands in the promoter regions of BRCA1 gene was aberrant in patients with sporadic breast tumors compared with healthy females or patients with benign diseases. However, these conclusions were not always consistent. Hence, a meta-analysis was performed to get a more precise estimate for these associations. Crude odds ratio with 95% confidence interval were used to assess the association of BRCA1 promoter methylation and the risk or clinicopathologic characteristics of breast cancers under fixed or random effect model. A total of 40 studies were eligible for this present study. We observed the frequency of BRCA1 promoter methylation was statistically significant higher in breast cancers than non-cancer controls. Furthermore, BRCA1 methylation was statistically associated with lymph node metastasis, histological grade 3, ER(-), PR(-), triple-negative phenotype, and decreased or lack levels of BRCA1 protein expression. In conclusion, this study indicated that BRCA1 promoter methylation appeared to be a useful predictive or prognostic biomarker for breast cancers in clinical assessment.

MicroRNA-874 (miR-874) is downregulated in several human cancers and has been suggested to be a tumor suppressor gene. However, the molecular mechanism of miR-874 downregulation in breast cancer has not been well elucidated. Here we aimed to study the aberrant hyper-methylation of CpG sites with the utility of miR-874 downreregulation in breast cancer and evaluate the clinical function of miR-874 as a prognostic marker. The miR-874 expressions in cells and tissues of two breast cancer lines were measured by real-time PCR. The DNA methylation status of the miR-874 promoter region in 19 pairs of breast cancer and adjacent normal samples was analyzed with Sequenom EpiTYPER MassArray. To evaluate whether miR-874 is a potential prognostic marker in breast cancer, we also explored the clinical long-time follow-up records from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We found miR-874 expression was downregulated in 47 pairs of breast cancer tissues. Moreover, univariate and multivariate analysis revealed miR-874 expression may be a prognostic biomarker of overall survival in breast cancer patients. Preconditioning with 5-Aza-CdR in two cell lines elevated miR-874 expressions. The data from Sequenom EpiTYPER MassArray showed that DNA methylation of the promoter region of miR-874 was upregulated and accompanied by decreased miR-874 expression, which was further confirmed by TCGA. After comprehensive considerations, we think miR-874, which might be served as a prognostic biomarker, is mediated by DNA methylation.. MicroRNA-874 (miR-874) is downregulated in several human cancers and has been suggested to be a tumor suppressor gene. However, the molecular mechanism of miR-874 downregulation in breast cancer has not been well elucidated. Here we aimed to study the aberrant hyper-methylation of CpG sites with the utility of miR-874 downreregulation in breast cancer and evaluate the clinical function of miR-874 as a prognostic marker. The miR-874 expressions in cells and tissues of two breast cancer lines were measured by real-time PCR. The DNA methylation status of the miR-874 promoter region in 19 pairs of breast cancer and adjacent normal samples was analyzed with Sequenom EpiTYPER MassArray. To evaluate whether miR-874 is a potential prognostic marker in breast cancer, we also explored the clinical long-time follow-up records from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). We found miR-874 expression was downregulated in 47 pairs of breast cancer tissues. Moreover, univariate and multivariate analysis revealed miR-874 expression may be a prognostic biomarker of overall survival in breast cancer patients. Preconditioning with 5-Aza-CdR in two cell lines elevated miR-874 expressions. The data from Sequenom EpiTYPER MassArray showed that DNA methylation of the promoter region of miR-874 was upregulated and accompanied by decreased miR-874 expression, which was further confirmed by TCGA. After comprehensive considerations, we think miR-874, which might be served as a prognostic biomarker, is mediated by DNA methylation.

p125 is one of four subunits of human DNA polymerases - DNA Pol delta as well as one of p53 target protein encoded by POLD1. However, the function and significance of p125 and the role that p53 plays in regulating p125 expression are not fully understood in breast cancer. Tissue sections of human breast cancer obtained from 70 patients whose median age was 47.6 years (range: 38-69 years) with stage II-III breast cancer were studied with normal breast tissue from the same patients and two human breast cell lines (MCF-7 and MCF-10A). p53 expression levels were reduced, while p125 protein expression was increased in human breast cancer tissues and cell line detected by Western blot and quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The methylation level of the POLD1 gene promoter was greater in breast cancer tissues and cells when compared with normal tissues and cells. In MCF-7 cell model, p53 overexpression caused a decrease in the level of p125 protein, while the methylation level of the p125 gene promoter was also inhibited by p53 overexpression. To further investigate the regulating mechanism of p53 on p125 expression, our study focused on DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and transcription factor Sp1. Both DNMT1 and Sp1 protein expression were reduced when p53 was overexpressed in MCF-7 cells. The Sp1 binding site appears to be important for DNMT1 gene transcription; Sp1 and p53 can bind together, which means that DNMT1 gene expression may be downregulated by p53 through binding to Sp1. Because DNMT1 methylation level of the p125 gene promoter can affect p125 gene transcription, we propose that p53 may indirectly regulate p125 gene promoter expression through the control of DNMT1 gene transcription. In conclusion, the data from this preliminary study have shown that p53 inhibits the methylation of p125 gene promoter by downregulating the activities of Sp1 and DNMT1 in breast cancer.. p125 is one of four subunits of human DNA polymerases - DNA Pol delta as well as one of p53 target protein encoded by POLD1. However, the function and significance of p125 and the role that p53 plays in regulating p125 expression are not fully understood in breast cancer. Tissue sections of human breast cancer obtained from 70 patients whose median age was 47.6 years (range: 38-69 years) with stage II-III breast cancer were studied with normal breast tissue from the same patients and two human breast cell lines (MCF-7 and MCF-10A). p53 expression levels were reduced, while p125 protein expression was increased in human breast cancer tissues and cell line detected by Western blot and quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The methylation level of the POLD1 gene promoter was greater in breast cancer tissues and cells when compared with normal tissues and cells. In MCF-7 cell model, p53 overexpression caused a decrease in the level of p125 protein, while the methylation level of the p125 gene promoter was also inhibited by p53 overexpression. To further investigate the regulating mechanism of p53 on p125 expression, our study focused on DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and transcription factor Sp1. Both DNMT1 and Sp1 protein expression were reduced when p53 was overexpressed in MCF-7 cells. The Sp1 binding site appears to be important for DNMT1 gene transcription; Sp1 and p53 can bind together, which means that DNMT1 gene expression may be downregulated by p53 through binding to Sp1. Because DNMT1 methylation level of the p125 gene promoter can affect p125 gene transcription, we propose that p53 may indirectly regulate p125 gene promoter expression through the control of DNMT1 gene transcription. In conclusion, the data from this preliminary study have shown that p53 inhibits the methylation of p125 gene promoter by downregulating the activities of Sp1 and DNMT1 in breast cancer.

Breast cancer has various molecular subtypes and displays high heterogeneity. Aberrant DNA methylation is involved in tumor origin, development and progression. Moreover, distinct DNA methylation patterns are associated with specific breast cancer subtypes. We explored DNA methylation patterns in association with gene expression to assess their impact on the prognosis of breast cancer based on Infinium 450K arrays (training set) from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The DNA methylation patterns of 12 featured genes that had a high correlation with gene expression were identified through univariate and multivariable Cox proportional hazards models and used to define the methylation risk score (MRS). An improved ability to distinguish the power of the DNA methylation pattern from the 12 featured genes (p = 0.00103) was observed compared with the average methylation levels (p = 0.956) or gene expression (p = 0.909). Furthermore, MRS provided a good prognostic value for breast cancers even when the patients had the same receptor status. We found that ER-, PR- or Her2- samples with high-MRS had the worst 5-year survival rate and overall survival time. An independent test set including 28 patients with death as an outcome was used to test the validity of the MRS of the 12 featured genes; this analysis obtained a prognostic value equivalent to the training set. The predict power was validated through two independent datasets from the GEO database. The DNA methylation pattern is a powerful predictor of breast cancer survival, and can predict outcomes of the same breast cancer molecular subtypes.. Breast cancer has various molecular subtypes and displays high heterogeneity. Aberrant DNA methylation is involved in tumor origin, development and progression. Moreover, distinct DNA methylation patterns are associated with specific breast cancer subtypes. We explored DNA methylation patterns in association with gene expression to assess their impact on the prognosis of breast cancer based on Infinium 450K arrays (training set) from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). The DNA methylation patterns of 12 featured genes that had a high correlation with gene expression were identified through univariate and multivariable Cox proportional hazards models and used to define the methylation risk score (MRS). An improved ability to distinguish the power of the DNA methylation pattern from the 12 featured genes (p = 0.00103) was observed compared with the average methylation levels (p = 0.956) or gene expression (p = 0.909). Furthermore, MRS provided a good prognostic value for breast cancers even when the patients had the same receptor status. We found that ER-, PR- or Her2- samples with high-MRS had the worst 5-year survival rate and overall survival time. An independent test set including 28 patients with death as an outcome was used to test the validity of the MRS of the 12 featured genes; this analysis obtained a prognostic value equivalent to the training set. The predict power was validated through two independent datasets from the GEO database. The DNA methylation pattern is a powerful predictor of breast cancer survival, and can predict outcomes of the same breast cancer molecular subtypes.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relevance between the promoter methylation status of Notch1 gene and the invasive ductal carcinoma and ductal hyperplastic lesions of the breast. METHODS: Methylation status of Notch1 gene in human breast invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC, n = 89), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS, n = 20), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH, n = 11) and usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH, n = 20) were quantitatively evaluated by MALDI-TOF MS. The expression of Notch1 protein was detected by immunohistochemical stain (SP method). RESULTS: Positive expression rates of Notch1 protein in IDC and DCIS were 91.0% (81/89) and 75.0% (15/20), respectively, which were significantly higher than those of ADH (4/11) and UDH (30.0%, 6/20;P < 0.05). Notch1 protein expression was correlated significantly with lymph node metastasis, pathological grades and TNM stages of IDC. The mean methylation levels of Notch1 gene at CpG_3, CpG_4.5 and CpG_8 significantly decreased in IDC group compared with those of DCIS, ADH and UDH groups (P < 0.0083). In breast carcinomas, the mean methylation rates of Notch1 gene at CpG_4.5, CpG_10.11, and CpG_14.15.16 loci in cases with axillary node metastasis were significantly lower than those without axillary node metastasis (P < 0.05); and the methylation rates at CpG_14.15.16 and CpG_18 loci in stage Iwere lower than that in stage II, further lower than that in stage III (P < 0.05); and that in CpG_1.2, CpG_12.13 loci in grade I (highly-differentiated group) were higher than that in grade II (moderate-differentiated group) and grade III (poorly-differentiated group) (P < 0.05); and the methylation rates at CpG_3, CpG_8 and CpG_14.15.16 loci in ER(+) PR(+) HER2(-) group were lower than that in ER(-) PR(-) HER2(+) group (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: There is an overall hypomethylation of Notch1 gene in breast invasive ductal carcinomas with corresponding over-expression of Notch1 protein. This inverse correlation show that the alteration of protein expression result from hypomethylation oncogene Notch1, and this change may have important significance in breast tumorigenesis and the development. Specific hypomethylation at CpG_3, CpG_ 4.5 and CpG_8 loci of Notch1 gene may play a role in the pathogenesis of breast carcinoma, suggesting the progression and/or malignant transformation from benign glandular lesions of the breast.. OBJECTIVE: To explore the relevance between the promoter methylation status of Notch1 gene and the invasive ductal carcinoma and ductal hyperplastic lesions of the breast. METHODS: Methylation status of Notch1 gene in human breast invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC, n = 89), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS, n = 20), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH, n = 11) and usual ductal hyperplasia (UDH, n = 20) were quantitatively evaluated by MALDI-TOF MS. The expression of Notch1 protein was detected by immunohistochemical stain (SP method). RESULTS: Positive expression rates of Notch1 protein in IDC and DCIS were 91.0% (81/89) and 75.0% (15/20), respectively, which were significantly higher than those of ADH (4/11) and UDH (30.0%, 6/20;P < 0.05). Notch1 protein expression was correlated significantly with lymph node metastasis, pathological grades and TNM stages of IDC. The mean methylation levels of Notch1 gene at CpG_3, CpG_4.5 and CpG_8 significantly decreased in IDC group compared with those of DCIS, ADH and UDH groups (P < 0.0083). In breast carcinomas, the mean methylation rates of Notch1 gene at CpG_4.5, CpG_10.11, and CpG_14.15.16 loci in cases with axillary node metastasis were significantly lower than those without axillary node metastasis (P < 0.05); and the methylation rates at CpG_14.15.16 and CpG_18 loci in stage Iwere lower than that in stage II, further lower than that in stage III (P < 0.05); and that in CpG_1.2, CpG_12.13 loci in grade I (highly-differentiated group) were higher than that in grade II (moderate-differentiated group) and grade III (poorly-differentiated group) (P < 0.05); and the methylation rates at CpG_3, CpG_8 and CpG_14.15.16 loci in ER(+) PR(+) HER2(-) group were lower than that in ER(-) PR(-) HER2(+) group (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: There is an overall hypomethylation of Notch1 gene in breast invasive ductal carcinomas with corresponding over-expression of Notch1 protein. This inverse correlation show that the alteration of protein expression result from hypomethylation oncogene Notch1, and this change may have important significance in breast tumorigenesis and the development. Specific hypomethylation at CpG_3, CpG_ 4.5 and CpG_8 loci of Notch1 gene may play a role in the pathogenesis of breast carcinoma, suggesting the progression and/or malignant transformation from benign glandular lesions of the breast.

Tumour heterogeneity is an obstacle to effective breast cancer diagnosis and therapy. DNA methylation is an important regulator of gene expression, thus characterizing tumour heterogeneity by epigenetic features can be clinically informative. In this study, we explored specific prognosis-subtypes based on DNA methylation status using 669 breast cancers from the TCGA database. Nine subgroups were distinguished by consensus clustering using 3869 CpGs that significantly influenced survival. The specific DNA methylation patterns were reflected by different races, ages, tumour stages, receptor status, histological types, metastasis status and prognosis. Compared with the PAM50 subtypes, which use gene expression clustering, DNA methylation subtypes were more elaborate and classified the Basal-like subtype into two different prognosis-subgroups. Additionally, 1252 CpGs (corresponding to 888 genes) were identified as specific hyper/hypomethylation sites for each specific subgroup. Finally, a prognosis model based on Bayesian network classification was constructed and used to classify the test set into DNA methylation subgroups, which corresponded to the classification results of the train set. These specific classifications by DNA methylation can explain the heterogeneity of previous molecular subgroups in breast cancer and will help in the development of personalized treatments for the new specific subtypes.. Tumour heterogeneity is an obstacle to effective breast cancer diagnosis and therapy. DNA methylation is an important regulator of gene expression, thus characterizing tumour heterogeneity by epigenetic features can be clinically informative. In this study, we explored specific prognosis-subtypes based on DNA methylation status using 669 breast cancers from the TCGA database. Nine subgroups were distinguished by consensus clustering using 3869 CpGs that significantly influenced survival. The specific DNA methylation patterns were reflected by different races, ages, tumour stages, receptor status, histological types, metastasis status and prognosis. Compared with the PAM50 subtypes, which use gene expression clustering, DNA methylation subtypes were more elaborate and classified the Basal-like subtype into two different prognosis-subgroups. Additionally, 1252 CpGs (corresponding to 888 genes) were identified as specific hyper/hypomethylation sites for each specific subgroup. Finally, a prognosis model based on Bayesian network classification was constructed and used to classify the test set into DNA methylation subgroups, which corresponded to the classification results of the train set. These specific classifications by DNA methylation can explain the heterogeneity of previous molecular subgroups in breast cancer and will help in the development of personalized treatments for the new specific subtypes.

The correlation between the expression of DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) and estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha), as well as the methylation status of ERalpha, was analyzed to investigate the clinical significance of DNMT1 and ERalpha in breast cancer. Substance P immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were utilized to detect the protein and mRNA expression levels of DNMT1 and ERalpha in 112 breast cancer and 20 normal breast specimens. Methylation specific PCR was utilized to detect the methylation status of ERalpha in ERalpha-positive and -negative breast cancer specimens and 20 normal breast specimens. The results of the present study revealed that DNMT1 protein and mRNA levels were low in normal breast specimens (10.00 and 46.05%, respectively) and ERalpha-positive breast cancer specimens (15.00 and 48.68%, respectively), compared with increased levels in ERalpha-negative breast cancer specimens (81.11 and 88.89%, respectively; P<0.05). The methylation rate of ERalpha was highest in ERalpha-negative breast cancer specimens (86.11%) compared with normal breast specimens and ERalpha-positive breast cancer specimens (10.00 and 36.84%, respectively; P<0.05). Positive expression of ERalpha protein was observed to be associated with progesterone receptor expression (P<0.05), however, no such association was observed for age, menopause state, tumor size, number of positive nodes, Tumor-Node-Metastasis stage or tumor type (P>0.05). The protein and mRNA expression levels of DNMT1 were negatively correlated with ERalpha expression (P<0.05). DNMT1 expression was positively correlated with methylation of ERalpha (P<0.05), and was positively correlated with the methylation of CpG islands of ERalpha, indicating that the detection of DNMT1 expression may be significant for the diagnosis and typing of breast cancer.. The correlation between the expression of DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) and estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha), as well as the methylation status of ERalpha, was analyzed to investigate the clinical significance of DNMT1 and ERalpha in breast cancer. Substance P immunohistochemistry and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were utilized to detect the protein and mRNA expression levels of DNMT1 and ERalpha in 112 breast cancer and 20 normal breast specimens. Methylation specific PCR was utilized to detect the methylation status of ERalpha in ERalpha-positive and -negative breast cancer specimens and 20 normal breast specimens. The results of the present study revealed that DNMT1 protein and mRNA levels were low in normal breast specimens (10.00 and 46.05%, respectively) and ERalpha-positive breast cancer specimens (15.00 and 48.68%, respectively), compared with increased levels in ERalpha-negative breast cancer specimens (81.11 and 88.89%, respectively; P<0.05). The methylation rate of ERalpha was highest in ERalpha-negative breast cancer specimens (86.11%) compared with normal breast specimens and ERalpha-positive breast cancer specimens (10.00 and 36.84%, respectively; P<0.05). Positive expression of ERalpha protein was observed to be associated with progesterone receptor expression (P<0.05), however, no such association was observed for age, menopause state, tumor size, number of positive nodes, Tumor-Node-Metastasis stage or tumor type (P>0.05). The protein and mRNA expression levels of DNMT1 were negatively correlated with ERalpha expression (P<0.05). DNMT1 expression was positively correlated with methylation of ERalpha (P<0.05), and was positively correlated with the methylation of CpG islands of ERalpha, indicating that the detection of DNMT1 expression may be significant for the diagnosis and typing of breast cancer.

Epigenetic modifications are critical determinants in tumor initiation and progression. This study aims to detect the promoter methylation status and the mRNA expression levels of ATG2B, ATG4D, ATG9A and ATG9B, and then to explore their relationship in invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) and matched normal tissues (MNTs) of the breast. Methylation was observed as follows: 61.0% in ATG2B, 46.8% in ATG4D, 56.4% in ATG9A, and 74.0% in ATG9B of IDCs. Meanwhile, their mRNA expression levels of the IDCs was lower than that of the MNTs (P<0.001, P=0.019, P<0.001 and P<0.001, respectively). Methylated IDCs of ATG2B, ATG9A, ATG9B and unmethylated ATG4D, ATG9B showed significantly lower expression values compared to the MNTs (P=0.003, P<0.001, P<0.001, P=0.014 and P=0.002, respectively). The methylations of ATG2B and ATG9B were related to their lower expression levels in IDCs (P=0.017 and P=0.023). Moreover, ATG2B methylation was positively associated with the grade (P=0.024) and TNM stage (P=0.015); Methylation of ATG4D and ATG9A was positively correlated to lymph node involvement (P=0.012 and P=0.018), while methylation of ATG9B appeared susceptible to CK5/6 positive status and deteriorated TNM stages (P=0.003 and P=0.012). Moreover, the decreased expression of ATG2B was related to the ER and PR status (P=0.004 and P=0.003). The ER, HER-2 and lymph node metastasis status are the determinants to reducing the expression of ATG4D, ATG9A and ATG9B (P=0.026, P=0.010 and P=0.011, respectively). This study highlights the transcriptional inactivation mechanisms of ATG2B, ATG4D, ATG9A and ATG9B promoter methylation status and the possible origin of autophagy signal pathway repression in IDCs.. Epigenetic modifications are critical determinants in tumor initiation and progression. This study aims to detect the promoter methylation status and the mRNA expression levels of ATG2B, ATG4D, ATG9A and ATG9B, and then to explore their relationship in invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) and matched normal tissues (MNTs) of the breast. Methylation was observed as follows: 61.0% in ATG2B, 46.8% in ATG4D, 56.4% in ATG9A, and 74.0% in ATG9B of IDCs. Meanwhile, their mRNA expression levels of the IDCs was lower than that of the MNTs (P<0.001, P=0.019, P<0.001 and P<0.001, respectively). Methylated IDCs of ATG2B, ATG9A, ATG9B and unmethylated ATG4D, ATG9B showed significantly lower expression values compared to the MNTs (P=0.003, P<0.001, P<0.001, P=0.014 and P=0.002, respectively). The methylations of ATG2B and ATG9B were related to their lower expression levels in IDCs (P=0.017 and P=0.023). Moreover, ATG2B methylation was positively associated with the grade (P=0.024) and TNM stage (P=0.015); Methylation of ATG4D and ATG9A was positively correlated to lymph node involvement (P=0.012 and P=0.018), while methylation of ATG9B appeared susceptible to CK5/6 positive status and deteriorated TNM stages (P=0.003 and P=0.012). Moreover, the decreased expression of ATG2B was related to the ER and PR status (P=0.004 and P=0.003). The ER, HER-2 and lymph node metastasis status are the determinants to reducing the expression of ATG4D, ATG9A and ATG9B (P=0.026, P=0.010 and P=0.011, respectively). This study highlights the transcriptional inactivation mechanisms of ATG2B, ATG4D, ATG9A and ATG9B promoter methylation status and the possible origin of autophagy signal pathway repression in IDCs.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protein expression of the p16 gene and the methylation of its promoter in breast cancer, and to analyze the correlation between the p16 DNA methylation and the clinicopathological features. METHODS: Immuno-histochemistry technique (SP method) and methylation-specific-PCR (MSP) were used to detect p16 protein expression and the methylation of the p16 promoter in 47 breast cancer samples as well as in 20 hyperplasia samples of mammary glands. Results The p16 protein expression in breast cancer samples significantly lower when compared with those of hyperplasia samples (48. 9% vs. 70. 0%) and p16 methylation was more frequent in breast-tumor tissues when compared with those of hyperplasia samples (38. 3% vs. 20. 0%), but the statistical significance wasn't found (P> 0. 05). Down-regulation of p16 protein was negatively correlation with p16 gene hypermethylation (r= -0. 33, P =0. 02). Meanwhile, p16 methylation in breast cancer tissues correlated with histological type, lymph node metastasis, but not correlated with the age, tumor diameter, TNM stage, expression of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) gene status. CONCLUSION: The downregulation of p16 protein induced by promoter methylation of p16 gene may not contribute to early cancinogenesis, but may contribute to progression of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protein expression of the p16 gene and the methylation of its promoter in breast cancer, and to analyze the correlation between the p16 DNA methylation and the clinicopathological features. METHODS: Immuno-histochemistry technique (SP method) and methylation-specific-PCR (MSP) were used to detect p16 protein expression and the methylation of the p16 promoter in 47 breast cancer samples as well as in 20 hyperplasia samples of mammary glands. Results The p16 protein expression in breast cancer samples significantly lower when compared with those of hyperplasia samples (48. 9% vs. 70. 0%) and p16 methylation was more frequent in breast-tumor tissues when compared with those of hyperplasia samples (38. 3% vs. 20. 0%), but the statistical significance wasn't found (P> 0. 05). Down-regulation of p16 protein was negatively correlation with p16 gene hypermethylation (r= -0. 33, P =0. 02). Meanwhile, p16 methylation in breast cancer tissues correlated with histological type, lymph node metastasis, but not correlated with the age, tumor diameter, TNM stage, expression of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) gene status. CONCLUSION: The downregulation of p16 protein induced by promoter methylation of p16 gene may not contribute to early cancinogenesis, but may contribute to progression of breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the interaction between miR-21 and DNA methylation in different breast cancer cells. METHODS: Fluorescence tagged miR-21 inhibitor and its negative control (NC) were transient transfected into MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell, the transfection efficiency was observed using fluorescence microscopy, and the miR-21 expression level and genome DNA methylation status before and after transfection were assessed by real-time PCR and bisulfite-qMSP respectively. To investigate the regulation effect of DNA methylation on miR-21, cells were treated with 5-AZA (2.5 micromol/L) for 72 h, with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) treatment as its negative control (NC), and the expression level of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN) and AKT(also known as Protein Kinase B), two downstream genes of miR-21 were detected by Western blot. RESULTS: The expression of miR-21 in MCF-7 cell was significantly knocked down (P < 0.01) by miR-21 inhibitor, with the genome DNA methylation level (P < 0.05) and all the three Dnmts: Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Dnmt3b unregulated. In contrast, the miR-21 expression in MDA-MB-231 cell was elevated ( P < 0.01) by miR-21 inhibitor, meanwhile, down- regulated of genome DNA methylation (P < 0.05) and Dnmt3b expression, upregulation of Dnmt3a were also observed. In addition, treated with 5-AZA resulted in significant increases of miR-21 expression in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells (P < 0.01), with the protein level of PTEN increased in MCF-7 cell, which was further involved in the downregulation of AKT. CONCLUSION: The regulation effects of DNA methylation by transient transfection of miR-21 in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells are almost opposite, whilst the expression of miR-21 in two cell lines were all upregulated by decreased DNA methylation level and our results may provide some experimental evidences for the future development of rational therapy for different breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: To determine the interaction between miR-21 and DNA methylation in different breast cancer cells. METHODS: Fluorescence tagged miR-21 inhibitor and its negative control (NC) were transient transfected into MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cell, the transfection efficiency was observed using fluorescence microscopy, and the miR-21 expression level and genome DNA methylation status before and after transfection were assessed by real-time PCR and bisulfite-qMSP respectively. To investigate the regulation effect of DNA methylation on miR-21, cells were treated with 5-AZA (2.5 micromol/L) for 72 h, with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) treatment as its negative control (NC), and the expression level of phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN) and AKT(also known as Protein Kinase B), two downstream genes of miR-21 were detected by Western blot. RESULTS: The expression of miR-21 in MCF-7 cell was significantly knocked down (P < 0.01) by miR-21 inhibitor, with the genome DNA methylation level (P < 0.05) and all the three Dnmts: Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Dnmt3b unregulated. In contrast, the miR-21 expression in MDA-MB-231 cell was elevated ( P < 0.01) by miR-21 inhibitor, meanwhile, down- regulated of genome DNA methylation (P < 0.05) and Dnmt3b expression, upregulation of Dnmt3a were also observed. In addition, treated with 5-AZA resulted in significant increases of miR-21 expression in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells (P < 0.01), with the protein level of PTEN increased in MCF-7 cell, which was further involved in the downregulation of AKT. CONCLUSION: The regulation effects of DNA methylation by transient transfection of miR-21 in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells are almost opposite, whilst the expression of miR-21 in two cell lines were all upregulated by decreased DNA methylation level and our results may provide some experimental evidences for the future development of rational therapy for different breast cancer.

Two novel estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) mRNA isoforms that diverge in their 5'-untranslated regions, ERbeta mRNA (0K-1) and ERbeta mRNA (0N-1), have recently been identified. This indicates that transcription of the human ERbeta gene occurs from at least two different promoters, named promoter 0K and promoter 0N. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of ERbeta isoforms in primary cultures of normal breast epithelial cells, a panel of breast cancer cell lines and in normal breast and breast cancer tissues; and to examine whether methylation of the two ERbeta promoters is involved in regulation of ERbeta gene expression. Using quantitative real-time PCR techniques, we found that ERbeta mRNA levels were significantly lower in breast cancer cell lines than in primary cultures of normal breast epithelial cells. Bisulfite genomic sequencing analysis revealed that two promoters of the ERbeta gene exhibit distinct methylation patterns. Promoter 0N was unmethylated in normal breast epithelial cells, but extensively methylated in breast cancer cell lines. In contrast, promoter 0K was unmethylated in both normal and malignant breast epithelial cells. We demonstrated a significant correlation between promoter 0N hypermethylation and loss of ERbeta mRNA expression in breast cancer cell lines. Treatment of breast cancer cells with demethylating agent effectively reactivated the expression of ERbeta mRNA. The observations from the cell lines were also reflected in primary breast cancer tumors. Thus, expression of ERbeta mRNA in breast tumors was found to be inversely associated with the degree of methylation of promoter 0N. Our results suggest that a decreased level of ERbeta mRNA may be associated with breast tumorigenesis, and that DNA methylation is an important mechanism for ERbeta gene silencing in breast cancer.. Two novel estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) mRNA isoforms that diverge in their 5'-untranslated regions, ERbeta mRNA (0K-1) and ERbeta mRNA (0N-1), have recently been identified. This indicates that transcription of the human ERbeta gene occurs from at least two different promoters, named promoter 0K and promoter 0N. The aim of this study was to investigate the expression of ERbeta isoforms in primary cultures of normal breast epithelial cells, a panel of breast cancer cell lines and in normal breast and breast cancer tissues; and to examine whether methylation of the two ERbeta promoters is involved in regulation of ERbeta gene expression. Using quantitative real-time PCR techniques, we found that ERbeta mRNA levels were significantly lower in breast cancer cell lines than in primary cultures of normal breast epithelial cells. Bisulfite genomic sequencing analysis revealed that two promoters of the ERbeta gene exhibit distinct methylation patterns. Promoter 0N was unmethylated in normal breast epithelial cells, but extensively methylated in breast cancer cell lines. In contrast, promoter 0K was unmethylated in both normal and malignant breast epithelial cells. We demonstrated a significant correlation between promoter 0N hypermethylation and loss of ERbeta mRNA expression in breast cancer cell lines. Treatment of breast cancer cells with demethylating agent effectively reactivated the expression of ERbeta mRNA. The observations from the cell lines were also reflected in primary breast cancer tumors. Thus, expression of ERbeta mRNA in breast tumors was found to be inversely associated with the degree of methylation of promoter 0N. Our results suggest that a decreased level of ERbeta mRNA may be associated with breast tumorigenesis, and that DNA methylation is an important mechanism for ERbeta gene silencing in breast cancer.

Estrogens play a key role in the genesis and progression of breast cancer, activating two estrogen receptors, alpha and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta). We have previously observed that ERalpha methylation occurs in high frequency and may be one of the mechanisms of ERalpha expression silence in a subset of Chinese sporadic breast cancers. However, the ERbeta promoter methylation status and the relationship between clinicopathological characteristics and ERbeta methylation in sporadic breast cancer are still unknown, especially in Chinese women. This study acted to determine the methylation status of the ERbeta promoter and its correlation with clinicopathological features of sporadic breast cancers in Chinese women, and lay a foundation for the management of breast cancer. In total, 178 cases with sporadic breast cancers were enrolled in the study. ERbeta methylation was determined using a methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). In general, ERbeta promoter methylation was found in 44.9% (80/178) of breast tumor samples, significantly higher than the benign breast hyperplasia (44.9% vs. 14.3%, X(2) = 4.986, P = 0.026). A total of 58% (40/69) of ERbeta-negative tumors got methylation compared with 36.7% (40/109) of ERbeta-positive cases being methylated (X(2) = 7.728, P = 0.005). The levels of ERbeta protein expression diminished with the frequency of ERbeta methylation (r = -0.249, P < 0.0001). In addition, we observed a strong correlation between ERalpha promoter and ERbeta promoter methylation (odds ratio 2.054, 95% confidence interval 1.086-3.886, P = 0.026), and the triple-negative tumors showed a significantly higher methylation rate of ERbeta. This study presents, for what we believe to be the first time, that ERbeta methylation is also a frequent event in breast cancer and maybe also one of the mechanisms of ERbeta expression silence in a subset of Chinese sporadic breast cancers. Epigenetic alteration of the ERbeta gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.. Estrogens play a key role in the genesis and progression of breast cancer, activating two estrogen receptors, alpha and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta). We have previously observed that ERalpha methylation occurs in high frequency and may be one of the mechanisms of ERalpha expression silence in a subset of Chinese sporadic breast cancers. However, the ERbeta promoter methylation status and the relationship between clinicopathological characteristics and ERbeta methylation in sporadic breast cancer are still unknown, especially in Chinese women. This study acted to determine the methylation status of the ERbeta promoter and its correlation with clinicopathological features of sporadic breast cancers in Chinese women, and lay a foundation for the management of breast cancer. In total, 178 cases with sporadic breast cancers were enrolled in the study. ERbeta methylation was determined using a methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). In general, ERbeta promoter methylation was found in 44.9% (80/178) of breast tumor samples, significantly higher than the benign breast hyperplasia (44.9% vs. 14.3%, X(2) = 4.986, P = 0.026). A total of 58% (40/69) of ERbeta-negative tumors got methylation compared with 36.7% (40/109) of ERbeta-positive cases being methylated (X(2) = 7.728, P = 0.005). The levels of ERbeta protein expression diminished with the frequency of ERbeta methylation (r = -0.249, P < 0.0001). In addition, we observed a strong correlation between ERalpha promoter and ERbeta promoter methylation (odds ratio 2.054, 95% confidence interval 1.086-3.886, P = 0.026), and the triple-negative tumors showed a significantly higher methylation rate of ERbeta. This study presents, for what we believe to be the first time, that ERbeta methylation is also a frequent event in breast cancer and maybe also one of the mechanisms of ERbeta expression silence in a subset of Chinese sporadic breast cancers. Epigenetic alteration of the ERbeta gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: (1) To investigate the promoter methylation status of gene p16(INK4a) and gene RB in breast carcinoma and the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic epithelial tissue. (2) To study the correlation of p16(INK4a) gene expression at protein level with the abnormal gene methylation, the clinical manifestation and the pathological parameters. METHODS: Methylation status of promoters of p16(INK4a) gene and RB gene was detected by using methylation specific PCR in 46 cases of breast cancer, 22 cases of the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic epithelium tissue and 7 cases of normal breast tissue. In addition, the p16(INK4a) gene protein expression level was also detected using immunohistochemical technique(SP method) in 46 cases of breast cancer and 22 cases of the adjacent hyperplastic epithelial tissue. RESULTS: The methylation rate of p16(INK4a) gene was 23.9% (11/46) in breast cancer, 18.2% (4/22) in the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic epithelial tissue and 1/7 in normal breast tissue, respectively. The methylation rate of RB gene was relatively low, which was 10.8% (5/46), 9.1% (2/22) and 0(0/7) in the above 3 groups, respectively. Methylation rate of p16(INK4a) gene and RB gene was not significantly different among the breast cancer, the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic tissue and the normal tissues (P > 0.05). However, the methylation status of p16(INK4a) gene was closely correlated with its protein expression level and the negative ER expression result of the breast cancer (P < 0.05), but not correlated with the size of the cancer, differentiation status, lymph node metastasis, and age. The methylation status of RB gene was correlated with lymph node metastasis, but not with the size, the differentiation status, ER expression of the breast cancer and the age of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: The abnormal methylation of p16(INK4a) gene may not play a significant role in the early stage of breast cancinogenesis, but may play a role of in the progression of the cancer. RB gene methylation may also be a indicator in choice to identify the progression and prognosis of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: (1) To investigate the promoter methylation status of gene p16(INK4a) and gene RB in breast carcinoma and the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic epithelial tissue. (2) To study the correlation of p16(INK4a) gene expression at protein level with the abnormal gene methylation, the clinical manifestation and the pathological parameters. METHODS: Methylation status of promoters of p16(INK4a) gene and RB gene was detected by using methylation specific PCR in 46 cases of breast cancer, 22 cases of the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic epithelium tissue and 7 cases of normal breast tissue. In addition, the p16(INK4a) gene protein expression level was also detected using immunohistochemical technique(SP method) in 46 cases of breast cancer and 22 cases of the adjacent hyperplastic epithelial tissue. RESULTS: The methylation rate of p16(INK4a) gene was 23.9% (11/46) in breast cancer, 18.2% (4/22) in the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic epithelial tissue and 1/7 in normal breast tissue, respectively. The methylation rate of RB gene was relatively low, which was 10.8% (5/46), 9.1% (2/22) and 0(0/7) in the above 3 groups, respectively. Methylation rate of p16(INK4a) gene and RB gene was not significantly different among the breast cancer, the adjacent non-neoplastic hyperplastic tissue and the normal tissues (P > 0.05). However, the methylation status of p16(INK4a) gene was closely correlated with its protein expression level and the negative ER expression result of the breast cancer (P < 0.05), but not correlated with the size of the cancer, differentiation status, lymph node metastasis, and age. The methylation status of RB gene was correlated with lymph node metastasis, but not with the size, the differentiation status, ER expression of the breast cancer and the age of the patients. CONCLUSIONS: The abnormal methylation of p16(INK4a) gene may not play a significant role in the early stage of breast cancinogenesis, but may play a role of in the progression of the cancer. RB gene methylation may also be a indicator in choice to identify the progression and prognosis of breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification with tumor suppressor gene silencing in cancer. The mechanisms underlying DNA methylation patterns are still poorly understood. This study aims to evaluate the potential value of FOXA1 for controlling gene CpG island methylation in breast cancer. METHODS: FOXA1 was down-regulated by transfection with siRNA and up-regulated by transfection with plasmid in MCF-7 cell lines. The DNA methylation and mRNA levels were examined by qMSP and qRT-PCR. The cell proliferation and apoptosis was detected by MTT and Flow cytometry. RESULTS: Suppression of FOXA1 enhanced the methylation status of DAPK, MGMT, RASSF1A, p53, and depressed mRNA levels of these tumor suppressor genes, whereas over-expression of FOXA1 showed the opposite effects. DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B mRNA were up-regulated by siRNA knock-down of FOXA1. At the same time, FOXA1 suppression promoted cell growth and inhibited apoptosis. CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 may be associated with methylation of the tumor suppressor genes promoter through changing DNMTs expression. FOXA1 could be a potential demethylation target for prevention and treatment of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification with tumor suppressor gene silencing in cancer. The mechanisms underlying DNA methylation patterns are still poorly understood. This study aims to evaluate the potential value of FOXA1 for controlling gene CpG island methylation in breast cancer. METHODS: FOXA1 was down-regulated by transfection with siRNA and up-regulated by transfection with plasmid in MCF-7 cell lines. The DNA methylation and mRNA levels were examined by qMSP and qRT-PCR. The cell proliferation and apoptosis was detected by MTT and Flow cytometry. RESULTS: Suppression of FOXA1 enhanced the methylation status of DAPK, MGMT, RASSF1A, p53, and depressed mRNA levels of these tumor suppressor genes, whereas over-expression of FOXA1 showed the opposite effects. DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B mRNA were up-regulated by siRNA knock-down of FOXA1. At the same time, FOXA1 suppression promoted cell growth and inhibited apoptosis. CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 may be associated with methylation of the tumor suppressor genes promoter through changing DNMTs expression. FOXA1 could be a potential demethylation target for prevention and treatment of breast cancer.

Methylation change plays an important role in many cellular systems, including cancer development. During recent years, genome-wide or large-scale methylation data has become available thanks to rapid advances in high-throughput biotechnologies. So far, researchers have always used gene expression profiling to study disease subtypes and related therapies. In this study, we investigated methylation profiles in 30 breast cancer cell lines using methylation data generated by microarray technologies. Strong variation of the number of methylation peaks was found among these 30 cell lines; however, more peaks were found in the upstream regions than in downstream regions of genes. We further grouped the methylation profiles of these cell lines into three consensus clusters. Finally, we performed an integrative analysis of breast cancer cell lines using both methylation and gene-expression profiling data. There was no significant correlation between methylation-profiling subtypes and gene-expression profiling subtypes, suggesting the complex nature of methylation in the regulation of gene expression. However, we found basal B cell lines appeared exclusively in two methylation clusters. Although these results are preliminary, this study suggests that methylation profiling might be promising in disease subtype classification and the development of therapeutic strategies.. Methylation change plays an important role in many cellular systems, including cancer development. During recent years, genome-wide or large-scale methylation data has become available thanks to rapid advances in high-throughput biotechnologies. So far, researchers have always used gene expression profiling to study disease subtypes and related therapies. In this study, we investigated methylation profiles in 30 breast cancer cell lines using methylation data generated by microarray technologies. Strong variation of the number of methylation peaks was found among these 30 cell lines; however, more peaks were found in the upstream regions than in downstream regions of genes. We further grouped the methylation profiles of these cell lines into three consensus clusters. Finally, we performed an integrative analysis of breast cancer cell lines using both methylation and gene-expression profiling data. There was no significant correlation between methylation-profiling subtypes and gene-expression profiling subtypes, suggesting the complex nature of methylation in the regulation of gene expression. However, we found basal B cell lines appeared exclusively in two methylation clusters. Although these results are preliminary, this study suggests that methylation profiling might be promising in disease subtype classification and the development of therapeutic strategies.

Homeobox protein Hox-D13 is encoded by HOXD13 gene which is frequently methylated in cancer and has been recognized as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic cancer. In this study, we examined HOXD13 mRNA expression in 40 pairs of breast cancers and corresponding normal breast tissues. Bisulfite sequencing of HOXD13 promoter was performed in 6 pairs of breast tumors and corresponding normal breast tissues to examine the potential HOXD13 CpG methylated sites. HOXD13 DNA methylation frequency analysis was performed using MethyLight in 196 pairs of breast cancers and corresponding normal breast samples. DNA methylation status and clinico-pathological features were investigated. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox proportional hazards models were utilized to assess the effect of methylation status on overall survival. We found that 60% (24/40) of breast cancers showed low HOXD13 mRNA expression when compared with corresponding normal breast tissue. The predicted CpG island was located in the -1325 bp to +675 bp region. Next, the -332 bp site in HOXD13 gene promoter was further examined and in 57.7% (113/196) samples methylation was detected at this site. HOXD13 methylation was correlated with larger tumor size (P = 0.004), but not with other clinico-pathological parameters. In addition, patients with methylated -HOXD13 promoter had worse overall survival (OS) (P = 0.005). Based on our results we conclude that HOXD13 methylation is a common event in primary breast cancer and is associated with poor survival of breast cancer patients. HOXD13 methylation could therefore potentially be used as a prognostic factor for breast cancer.. Homeobox protein Hox-D13 is encoded by HOXD13 gene which is frequently methylated in cancer and has been recognized as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic cancer. In this study, we examined HOXD13 mRNA expression in 40 pairs of breast cancers and corresponding normal breast tissues. Bisulfite sequencing of HOXD13 promoter was performed in 6 pairs of breast tumors and corresponding normal breast tissues to examine the potential HOXD13 CpG methylated sites. HOXD13 DNA methylation frequency analysis was performed using MethyLight in 196 pairs of breast cancers and corresponding normal breast samples. DNA methylation status and clinico-pathological features were investigated. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox proportional hazards models were utilized to assess the effect of methylation status on overall survival. We found that 60% (24/40) of breast cancers showed low HOXD13 mRNA expression when compared with corresponding normal breast tissue. The predicted CpG island was located in the -1325 bp to +675 bp region. Next, the -332 bp site in HOXD13 gene promoter was further examined and in 57.7% (113/196) samples methylation was detected at this site. HOXD13 methylation was correlated with larger tumor size (P = 0.004), but not with other clinico-pathological parameters. In addition, patients with methylated -HOXD13 promoter had worse overall survival (OS) (P = 0.005). Based on our results we conclude that HOXD13 methylation is a common event in primary breast cancer and is associated with poor survival of breast cancer patients. HOXD13 methylation could therefore potentially be used as a prognostic factor for breast cancer.

Background. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is widely known as an antagonist of the Wnt signaling pathway via the inactivation of beta-catenin. An increasing number of studies have reported that APC methylation contributes to the predisposition to breast cancer (BC). However, recent studies have yielded conflicting results. Methods. Herein, we systematically carried out a meta-analysis to assess the correlation between APC methylation and BC risk. Based on searches of the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Web of Science and Embase databases, the odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) values were pooled and summarized. Results. A total of 31 articles involving 35 observational studies with 2,483 cases and 1,218 controls met the inclusion criteria. The results demonstrated that the frequency of APC methylation was significantly higher in BC cases than controls under a random effect model (OR = 8.92, 95% CI [5.12-15.52]). Subgroup analysis further confirmed the reliable results, regardless of the sample types detected, methylation detection methods applied and different regions included. Interestingly, our results also showed that the frequency of APC methylation was significantly lower in early-stage BC patients than late-stage ones (OR = 0.62, 95% CI [0.42-0.93]). Conclusion. APC methylation might play an indispensable role in the pathogenesis of BC and could be regarded as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of BC.. Background. Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) is widely known as an antagonist of the Wnt signaling pathway via the inactivation of beta-catenin. An increasing number of studies have reported that APC methylation contributes to the predisposition to breast cancer (BC). However, recent studies have yielded conflicting results. Methods. Herein, we systematically carried out a meta-analysis to assess the correlation between APC methylation and BC risk. Based on searches of the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Web of Science and Embase databases, the odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) values were pooled and summarized. Results. A total of 31 articles involving 35 observational studies with 2,483 cases and 1,218 controls met the inclusion criteria. The results demonstrated that the frequency of APC methylation was significantly higher in BC cases than controls under a random effect model (OR = 8.92, 95% CI [5.12-15.52]). Subgroup analysis further confirmed the reliable results, regardless of the sample types detected, methylation detection methods applied and different regions included. Interestingly, our results also showed that the frequency of APC methylation was significantly lower in early-stage BC patients than late-stage ones (OR = 0.62, 95% CI [0.42-0.93]). Conclusion. APC methylation might play an indispensable role in the pathogenesis of BC and could be regarded as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of BC.

Kaiso is a Pox Virus and Zinc Finger (POZ-ZF) transcription factor with bi-modal DNA-binding specificity. Here, we demonstrated that Kaiso expression is inversely correlated with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression in breast carcinomas. Knockdown of Kaiso increased GR expression, while overexpression of Kaiso inhibited GR expression in breast cancer cells. Furthermore, Kaiso repressed GR proximal promoter-reporter activity in a dose-dependent manner. Remarkably, ChIP experiments demonstrated that endogenous Kaiso was associated with the GR promoter sequence in a methylation-dependent manner. Since glucocorticoids inhibit chemotherapyinduced apoptosis and have been widely used as a co-treatment of patients with breast cancer, we assessed the role of Kasio in GR-mediated anti-apoptotic effects. We found that overexpression of Kaiso attenuated the anti-apoptotic effects of glucocorticoids in breast cancer cells. Our findings suggest that GR is a putative target gene of Kaiso and suggest Kaiso to be a potential therapeutic target in GC-combination chemotherapy in breast cancer. [BMB Reports 2016; 49(3): 167-172].. Kaiso is a Pox Virus and Zinc Finger (POZ-ZF) transcription factor with bi-modal DNA-binding specificity. Here, we demonstrated that Kaiso expression is inversely correlated with glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression in breast carcinomas. Knockdown of Kaiso increased GR expression, while overexpression of Kaiso inhibited GR expression in breast cancer cells. Furthermore, Kaiso repressed GR proximal promoter-reporter activity in a dose-dependent manner. Remarkably, ChIP experiments demonstrated that endogenous Kaiso was associated with the GR promoter sequence in a methylation-dependent manner. Since glucocorticoids inhibit chemotherapyinduced apoptosis and have been widely used as a co-treatment of patients with breast cancer, we assessed the role of Kasio in GR-mediated anti-apoptotic effects. We found that overexpression of Kaiso attenuated the anti-apoptotic effects of glucocorticoids in breast cancer cells. Our findings suggest that GR is a putative target gene of Kaiso and suggest Kaiso to be a potential therapeutic target in GC-combination chemotherapy in breast cancer. [BMB Reports 2016; 49(3): 167-172].

Human tumors undergo massive changes in DNA methylation. Recent studies showed that site-specific methylation of CpG sites is determined by the DNA sequence context surrounding the CpG site, which alludes to a possible mechanism for site-specific aberrant DNA methylation in cancer through DNA-binding proteins. In this paper, DNA methylation data and RNA-Seq data of breast tumors and normal tissues in the database of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were integrated with information of DNA motifs in seven databases to find DNA-binding proteins and their binding motifs that were involved in aberrant DNA methylation in breast cancer. A total of 42,850 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) that include 77,298 CpG sites were detected in breast cancer. One hundred eight DNA motifs were found to be enriched in DMRs, and 109 genes encoding proteins binding to these motifs were determined. Based on these motifs and genes, 63 methylation modulator genes were identified to regulate differentially methylated CpG sites in breast cancer. A network of these 63 modulator genes and 645 transcription factors was constructed, and 20 network modules were determined. A number of pathways and gene sets related to breast cancer were found to be enriched in these network modules. The 63 methylation modulator genes identified may play an important role in aberrant methylation of CpG sites in breast cancer. They may help to understand site-specific dysregulation of DNA methylation and provide epigenetic markers for breast cancer.. Human tumors undergo massive changes in DNA methylation. Recent studies showed that site-specific methylation of CpG sites is determined by the DNA sequence context surrounding the CpG site, which alludes to a possible mechanism for site-specific aberrant DNA methylation in cancer through DNA-binding proteins. In this paper, DNA methylation data and RNA-Seq data of breast tumors and normal tissues in the database of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were integrated with information of DNA motifs in seven databases to find DNA-binding proteins and their binding motifs that were involved in aberrant DNA methylation in breast cancer. A total of 42,850 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) that include 77,298 CpG sites were detected in breast cancer. One hundred eight DNA motifs were found to be enriched in DMRs, and 109 genes encoding proteins binding to these motifs were determined. Based on these motifs and genes, 63 methylation modulator genes were identified to regulate differentially methylated CpG sites in breast cancer. A network of these 63 modulator genes and 645 transcription factors was constructed, and 20 network modules were determined. A number of pathways and gene sets related to breast cancer were found to be enriched in these network modules. The 63 methylation modulator genes identified may play an important role in aberrant methylation of CpG sites in breast cancer. They may help to understand site-specific dysregulation of DNA methylation and provide epigenetic markers for breast cancer.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between the methylation status of CpG islands in the promoter region of 10 genes in breast cancer cells and their sensitivity to 5-fluouracil (5-Fu), and to identify the genes responsible for the 5-Fu resistance in breast cancer. METHODS: Three cell lines (differently resistant to chemotherapy) were used in this study: Bcap-37 (IC(50): 289.77 microg/ml), T47D (IC(50): 134.16 microg/ml) and ZR-75-30 (IC(50): 4.20 microg/ml). The methylation profile of 10 genes (BAG1, C11ORF31, CBR1, CBR4, GJA1, FOXL2, IGFBP6, P4HA1, SRI and TYMS) in the 3 breast cancer cell lines was determined by methylation specific PCR. The steady-state mRNAs of ABCC8, CHFR and IGFBP6 genes were quantified by real-time RT PCR analysis. RESULTS: Among the 10 genes, only genes IGFBP6 and FOXL2 displayed differential DNA methylation pattern between the 5-Fu-resistant and 5-Fu-sensitive cell lines. The mRNA expression level of genes PRSS21, LOX, IGFBP6, ABCC8 and CHFR was quantified by real-time RT-PCR analysis. Except for CHFR, the expression level of the other 4 genes was correlated with the methylation status of CpG islands, namely, a lower expression level with methylation status and a higher level with demethylation status. CONCLUSION: The results of the present study have demonstrated that there are 8 genes with differential methylation status in chemosensitive and chemoresistant breast cancer cell lines, i.e. two genes more than the six genes we reported previously. Our findings provide both mechanistic insights for the drug resistance of breast cancer and the basis for further studies on potential application of the DNA methylation in this set of genes for prediction of chemosensitivity of breast cancer.. OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between the methylation status of CpG islands in the promoter region of 10 genes in breast cancer cells and their sensitivity to 5-fluouracil (5-Fu), and to identify the genes responsible for the 5-Fu resistance in breast cancer. METHODS: Three cell lines (differently resistant to chemotherapy) were used in this study: Bcap-37 (IC(50): 289.77 microg/ml), T47D (IC(50): 134.16 microg/ml) and ZR-75-30 (IC(50): 4.20 microg/ml). The methylation profile of 10 genes (BAG1, C11ORF31, CBR1, CBR4, GJA1, FOXL2, IGFBP6, P4HA1, SRI and TYMS) in the 3 breast cancer cell lines was determined by methylation specific PCR. The steady-state mRNAs of ABCC8, CHFR and IGFBP6 genes were quantified by real-time RT PCR analysis. RESULTS: Among the 10 genes, only genes IGFBP6 and FOXL2 displayed differential DNA methylation pattern between the 5-Fu-resistant and 5-Fu-sensitive cell lines. The mRNA expression level of genes PRSS21, LOX, IGFBP6, ABCC8 and CHFR was quantified by real-time RT-PCR analysis. Except for CHFR, the expression level of the other 4 genes was correlated with the methylation status of CpG islands, namely, a lower expression level with methylation status and a higher level with demethylation status. CONCLUSION: The results of the present study have demonstrated that there are 8 genes with differential methylation status in chemosensitive and chemoresistant breast cancer cell lines, i.e. two genes more than the six genes we reported previously. Our findings provide both mechanistic insights for the drug resistance of breast cancer and the basis for further studies on potential application of the DNA methylation in this set of genes for prediction of chemosensitivity of breast cancer.

OBJECTIVES: Recent molecular studies show that the absence of estrogen receptor (ER) alpha gene expression in breast cancer is associated with methylation of the CpG island located in the 5' region and the first exon of the ER alpha gene. Because CpG island methylation is an early event in carcinogenesis and because a methyl-deficient diet may lead to abnormal DNA methylation including CpG island methylation, we hypothesized that a methyl-deficient diet is more likely to be associated with breast cancer with methylated ER alpha gene CpG islands. This study aimed to test this hypothesis in African-American women using a case-control design. METHODS: Cases were 304 African-American women pathologically diagnosed with breast cancer during 1995-1998 who lived in three Tennessee counties. Controls were 305 African-American women without breast cancer, who were selected through random-digit dialing and frequency matched to cases by 5-year age range and county of residence. Information on dietary intake and other risk factors was collected through telephone interviews. Dietary methyl-components were defined based on folate and methionine intakes and alcohol consumption. Tumor tissue samples were collected for measuring methylation status of the ER alpha gene. RESULTS: Our results showed that the odds ratio (OR) estimates for lower dietary folate intake were 2.0 (95% confidence interval, CI: 0.8-4.8) for cases with a methylated ER alpha gene, 0.6 (95% CI: 0.3-1.5) for cases with an unmethylated ER alpha gene, and 1.6 (95% CI: 0.7-3.8) for cases with unknown methylation status (presumably including cases with both methylated and un-methylated genes). However, low methionine intake appeared more likely to be associated with tumors with unknown methylation status and high level of alcohol consumption seemed more likely to be related to tumors with un-methylated genes. CONCLUSIONS: These results did not show a pattern consistent with the study hypothesis that methyl-deficient diets are more likely related to breast cancer with a methylated ER gene.. OBJECTIVES: Recent molecular studies show that the absence of estrogen receptor (ER) alpha gene expression in breast cancer is associated with methylation of the CpG island located in the 5' region and the first exon of the ER alpha gene. Because CpG island methylation is an early event in carcinogenesis and because a methyl-deficient diet may lead to abnormal DNA methylation including CpG island methylation, we hypothesized that a methyl-deficient diet is more likely to be associated with breast cancer with methylated ER alpha gene CpG islands. This study aimed to test this hypothesis in African-American women using a case-control design. METHODS: Cases were 304 African-American women pathologically diagnosed with breast cancer during 1995-1998 who lived in three Tennessee counties. Controls were 305 African-American women without breast cancer, who were selected through random-digit dialing and frequency matched to cases by 5-year age range and county of residence. Information on dietary intake and other risk factors was collected through telephone interviews. Dietary methyl-components were defined based on folate and methionine intakes and alcohol consumption. Tumor tissue samples were collected for measuring methylation status of the ER alpha gene. RESULTS: Our results showed that the odds ratio (OR) estimates for lower dietary folate intake were 2.0 (95% confidence interval, CI: 0.8-4.8) for cases with a methylated ER alpha gene, 0.6 (95% CI: 0.3-1.5) for cases with an unmethylated ER alpha gene, and 1.6 (95% CI: 0.7-3.8) for cases with unknown methylation status (presumably including cases with both methylated and un-methylated genes). However, low methionine intake appeared more likely to be associated with tumors with unknown methylation status and high level of alcohol consumption seemed more likely to be related to tumors with un-methylated genes. CONCLUSIONS: These results did not show a pattern consistent with the study hypothesis that methyl-deficient diets are more likely related to breast cancer with a methylated ER gene.

Genome-wide association studies highlight the importance of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor as a risk factor for breast cancer development. In particular, FGFR4 has been implicated in membrane ruffling, cancer cell invasiveness, and clinical chemoresistance in breast cancer. In this work, we studied FGFR4 in both human breast cancers and cell lines. We examined primary human microdissected breast samples for FGFR4 mutations, polymorphisms, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and DNA methylation status. We identified no activating somatic mutations of FGFR4; however, we did identify a high proportion of the FGFR4-R388 heterozygous germline polymorphism. Analysis of paired microdissected samples uncovered selective LOH at the FGFR4 locus in 50% of primary tumors. This LOH involved the FGFR4-WT allele as frequently as the cancer progression-associated FGFR4-G388R polymorphic allele. Further, we identified DNA methylation in one-third of cases that targeted the FGFR4-WT allele more often and occurred more frequently either in concert with or exclusively in lymph node metastases. The role of DNA methylation in silencing the FGFR4-WT allele was supported by azacytidine treatment findings and was also confirmed in mouse xenograft studies, demonstrating selective FGFR4-WT allelic methylation with corresponding gene down-regulation. These findings support a growth advantage function for FGFR4-R388 and underscore the complex role of DNA methylation and LOH in determining the penetrance of allelic selection in breast cancer progression. These findings therefore have critical therapeutic importance.. Genome-wide association studies highlight the importance of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor as a risk factor for breast cancer development. In particular, FGFR4 has been implicated in membrane ruffling, cancer cell invasiveness, and clinical chemoresistance in breast cancer. In this work, we studied FGFR4 in both human breast cancers and cell lines. We examined primary human microdissected breast samples for FGFR4 mutations, polymorphisms, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and DNA methylation status. We identified no activating somatic mutations of FGFR4; however, we did identify a high proportion of the FGFR4-R388 heterozygous germline polymorphism. Analysis of paired microdissected samples uncovered selective LOH at the FGFR4 locus in 50% of primary tumors. This LOH involved the FGFR4-WT allele as frequently as the cancer progression-associated FGFR4-G388R polymorphic allele. Further, we identified DNA methylation in one-third of cases that targeted the FGFR4-WT allele more often and occurred more frequently either in concert with or exclusively in lymph node metastases. The role of DNA methylation in silencing the FGFR4-WT allele was supported by azacytidine treatment findings and was also confirmed in mouse xenograft studies, demonstrating selective FGFR4-WT allelic methylation with corresponding gene down-regulation. These findings support a growth advantage function for FGFR4-R388 and underscore the complex role of DNA methylation and LOH in determining the penetrance of allelic selection in breast cancer progression. These findings therefore have critical therapeutic importance.

BACKGROUND: Death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK) is an important tumor suppressor kinase involved in the regulation of multiple cellular activities such as apoptosis and autophagy. DNA methylation of DAPK gene was found in various types of cancers and often correlated with the clinicopathological characteristics. However, the mRNA and protein expression of DAPK in the same sample was rarely measured. Thus, it was unclear if the correlation between DAPK gene methylation and clinicopathological parameters was due to the loss of DAPK expression. METHODS: In this study, the DNA methylation rate, mRNA and protein expression of DAPK was quantitatively detected in 15 pairs of breast cancer patient samples including tumor (T) and adjacent non-tumor (N) tissues. RESULTS: The correlation between DNA methylation rate and mRNA expression, together with the correlation between mRNA and protein expression, was calculated. No correlation was observed between any levels using either the measurement value of each sample or the T/N ratio of each pair. DISCUSSION: These data suggested that the DNA methylation status of DAPK did not correlate well with its mRNA or protein expression. Extra caution is needed when interpreting the DNA methylation data of DAPK gene in clinical studies.. BACKGROUND: Death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK) is an important tumor suppressor kinase involved in the regulation of multiple cellular activities such as apoptosis and autophagy. DNA methylation of DAPK gene was found in various types of cancers and often correlated with the clinicopathological characteristics. However, the mRNA and protein expression of DAPK in the same sample was rarely measured. Thus, it was unclear if the correlation between DAPK gene methylation and clinicopathological parameters was due to the loss of DAPK expression. METHODS: In this study, the DNA methylation rate, mRNA and protein expression of DAPK was quantitatively detected in 15 pairs of breast cancer patient samples including tumor (T) and adjacent non-tumor (N) tissues. RESULTS: The correlation between DNA methylation rate and mRNA expression, together with the correlation between mRNA and protein expression, was calculated. No correlation was observed between any levels using either the measurement value of each sample or the T/N ratio of each pair. DISCUSSION: These data suggested that the DNA methylation status of DAPK did not correlate well with its mRNA or protein expression. Extra caution is needed when interpreting the DNA methylation data of DAPK gene in clinical studies.

Background: The DNA methyltransferase 1 inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) is a potential treatment for breast cancer. However, not all breast tumors will respond similarly to treatment with 5-Aza-dC, and little is known regarding the response of hormone-resistant breast cancers to 5-Aza-dC. Methods: We demonstrate that 5-Aza-dC-treatment has a stronger effect on an estrogen receptor-negative, Tamoxifen-selected cell line, TMX2-28, than on the estrogen receptor-positive, MCF7, parental cell line. Using data obtained from the HM450 Methylation Bead Chip, pyrosequencing, and RT-qPCR, we identified a panel of genes that are silenced by promoter methylation in TMX2-28 and re-expressed after treatment with 5-Aza-dC. Results: One of the genes identified, tumor associated calcium signal transducer 2 (TACSTD2), is altered by DNA methylation, and there is evidence that in some cancers decreased expression may result in greater proliferation. Analysis of DNA methylation of TACSTD2 and protein expression of its product, trophoblast antigen protein 2 (TROP2), was extended to a panel of primary (n = 34) and recurrent (n = 34) breast tumors. Stratifying tumors by both recurrence and ER status showed no significant relationship between TROP2 levels and TACSTD2 methylation. Knocking down TACSTD2 expression in MCF7 increased proliferation however; re-expressing TACSTD2 in TMX2-28 did not inhibit proliferation, indicating that TACSTD2 re-expression alone was insufficient to explain the decreased proliferation observed after treatment with 5-Aza-dC. Conclusions: These results illustrate the complexity of the TROP2 signaling network. However, TROP2 may be a valid therapeutic target for some cancers. Further studies are needed to identify biomarkers that indicate how TROP2 signaling affects tumor growth and whether targeting TROP2 would be beneficial to the patient.. Background: The DNA methyltransferase 1 inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) is a potential treatment for breast cancer. However, not all breast tumors will respond similarly to treatment with 5-Aza-dC, and little is known regarding the response of hormone-resistant breast cancers to 5-Aza-dC. Methods: We demonstrate that 5-Aza-dC-treatment has a stronger effect on an estrogen receptor-negative, Tamoxifen-selected cell line, TMX2-28, than on the estrogen receptor-positive, MCF7, parental cell line. Using data obtained from the HM450 Methylation Bead Chip, pyrosequencing, and RT-qPCR, we identified a panel of genes that are silenced by promoter methylation in TMX2-28 and re-expressed after treatment with 5-Aza-dC. Results: One of the genes identified, tumor associated calcium signal transducer 2 (TACSTD2), is altered by DNA methylation, and there is evidence that in some cancers decreased expression may result in greater proliferation. Analysis of DNA methylation of TACSTD2 and protein expression of its product, trophoblast antigen protein 2 (TROP2), was extended to a panel of primary (n = 34) and recurrent (n = 34) breast tumors. Stratifying tumors by both recurrence and ER status showed no significant relationship between TROP2 levels and TACSTD2 methylation. Knocking down TACSTD2 expression in MCF7 increased proliferation however; re-expressing TACSTD2 in TMX2-28 did not inhibit proliferation, indicating that TACSTD2 re-expression alone was insufficient to explain the decreased proliferation observed after treatment with 5-Aza-dC. Conclusions: These results illustrate the complexity of the TROP2 signaling network. However, TROP2 may be a valid therapeutic target for some cancers. Further studies are needed to identify biomarkers that indicate how TROP2 signaling affects tumor growth and whether targeting TROP2 would be beneficial to the patient.

Breast carcinoma is the most common cancer with high mortality caused by metastatic disease. New molecular biomarkers predicting the tumour's metastatic potential would therefore improve metastasis prevention and personalised care. The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between DNA methylation levels in invasivity and metastasising associated genes with aberrant protein expression and also to evaluate whether a similar DNA methylation level is present in the tumour and circulating cell-free DNA for utilising plasma DNA methylation as prognostic biomarker. By using pyrosequencing, we analysed DNA methylation levels of 11 genes, namely APC, ADAM23, CXCL12, ESR1, PGR B, CDH1, RASSF1A, SYK, TIMP3, BRMS1 and SOCS1 in tumour, plasma and peripheral blood cells from 34 patients with primary breast cancer, as well as plasma and peripheral blood cells from 50 healthy controls. Simultaneously, the expression of related proteins in paraffin-embedded tumour samples was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS statistics 15.0 software. Tumour DNA hypermethylation was found in most commonly methylated RASSF1A (71.9%), APC (55.9%), ADAM23 (38%) and CXCL12 (34.4%) genes with methylation levels up to 86, 86, 53 and 64 %, respectively. In tumours, significantly higher methylation levels were found in nine genes, compared with the patients peripheral blood cell DNA. Furthermore, in patients methylation levels in peripheral blood cell DNA were significantly higher than in controls in CXCL12, ESR1 and TIMP3 genes, but the values did not exceed 15%. On the other hand, no correlations were observed in patients between DNA methylation in tumours and cell-free plasma DNA. Moreover, in patients and controls nearly identical values of cumulative DNA methylation (43.6 % +/- 20.1 vs. 43.7 % +/- 15.0) were observed in plasma samples. A variable spectrum from high to none expressions presented in tumour tissues in all of the proteins evaluated, however in APC and CXCL12 genes a visible decreasing trend of mean DNA methylation level with increasing expression of the corresponding protein was observed. The DNA methylation profiles manifested in our group of breast carcinomas are cancer specific, but they are not the only cause that affects the silencing of evaluated genes and the decrease of relevant protein products. The clinical utility of DNA methylation testing in peripheral blood cell DNA for cancer diagnosis and therapy need to be further investigated.. Breast carcinoma is the most common cancer with high mortality caused by metastatic disease. New molecular biomarkers predicting the tumour's metastatic potential would therefore improve metastasis prevention and personalised care. The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between DNA methylation levels in invasivity and metastasising associated genes with aberrant protein expression and also to evaluate whether a similar DNA methylation level is present in the tumour and circulating cell-free DNA for utilising plasma DNA methylation as prognostic biomarker. By using pyrosequencing, we analysed DNA methylation levels of 11 genes, namely APC, ADAM23, CXCL12, ESR1, PGR B, CDH1, RASSF1A, SYK, TIMP3, BRMS1 and SOCS1 in tumour, plasma and peripheral blood cells from 34 patients with primary breast cancer, as well as plasma and peripheral blood cells from 50 healthy controls. Simultaneously, the expression of related proteins in paraffin-embedded tumour samples was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS statistics 15.0 software. Tumour DNA hypermethylation was found in most commonly methylated RASSF1A (71.9%), APC (55.9%), ADAM23 (38%) and CXCL12 (34.4%) genes with methylation levels up to 86, 86, 53 and 64 %, respectively. In tumours, significantly higher methylation levels were found in nine genes, compared with the patients peripheral blood cell DNA. Furthermore, in patients methylation levels in peripheral blood cell DNA were significantly higher than in controls in CXCL12, ESR1 and TIMP3 genes, but the values did not exceed 15%. On the other hand, no correlations were observed in patients between DNA methylation in tumours and cell-free plasma DNA. Moreover, in patients and controls nearly identical values of cumulative DNA methylation (43.6 % +/- 20.1 vs. 43.7 % +/- 15.0) were observed in plasma samples. A variable spectrum from high to none expressions presented in tumour tissues in all of the proteins evaluated, however in APC and CXCL12 genes a visible decreasing trend of mean DNA methylation level with increasing expression of the corresponding protein was observed. The DNA methylation profiles manifested in our group of breast carcinomas are cancer specific, but they are not the only cause that affects the silencing of evaluated genes and the decrease of relevant protein products. The clinical utility of DNA methylation testing in peripheral blood cell DNA for cancer diagnosis and therapy need to be further investigated.

Allele loss and loss of expression of fragile histidine triad (FHIT), a putative tumor suppressor gene located in chromosome region 3p14.2, are frequent in several types of cancers. Tumor-acquired methylation of promoter region CpG islands is one method for silencing tumor suppressor genes. We investigated 5' CpG island methylation of the FHIT gene in 107 primary non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples and corresponding nonmalignant lung tissues, 39 primary breast carcinomas, as well as in 49 lung and 22 breast cancer cell lines by a methylation-specific PCR assay. In addition, we analyzed brushes from the bronchial epithelium of 35 heavy smokers without cancer. FHIT methylation was detected in 37% of primary NSCLCs, 31% of primary breast cancers, and 65% of lung and 86% of breast cancer cell lines. The frequency of methylation in small cell and NSCLC cell lines were identical. Methylation was found in 9% of the corresponding nonmalignant lung tissues and in 17% of bronchial brushes from heavy cigarette smokers. FHIT methylation was significantly correlated with loss of FHIT mRNA expression by Northern blot analysis in lung cancer cell lines and with loss of Fhit expression in NSCLC and breast tumors by immunostaining. We conclude that methylation of FHIT is a frequent event in NSCLC and breast cancers and is an important mechanism for loss of expression of this gene. Methylation of FHIT commences during lung cancer pathogenesis and may represent a marker for risk assessment.. Allele loss and loss of expression of fragile histidine triad (FHIT), a putative tumor suppressor gene located in chromosome region 3p14.2, are frequent in several types of cancers. Tumor-acquired methylation of promoter region CpG islands is one method for silencing tumor suppressor genes. We investigated 5' CpG island methylation of the FHIT gene in 107 primary non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples and corresponding nonmalignant lung tissues, 39 primary breast carcinomas, as well as in 49 lung and 22 breast cancer cell lines by a methylation-specific PCR assay. In addition, we analyzed brushes from the bronchial epithelium of 35 heavy smokers without cancer. FHIT methylation was detected in 37% of primary NSCLCs, 31% of primary breast cancers, and 65% of lung and 86% of breast cancer cell lines. The frequency of methylation in small cell and NSCLC cell lines were identical. Methylation was found in 9% of the corresponding nonmalignant lung tissues and in 17% of bronchial brushes from heavy cigarette smokers. FHIT methylation was significantly correlated with loss of FHIT mRNA expression by Northern blot analysis in lung cancer cell lines and with loss of Fhit expression in NSCLC and breast tumors by immunostaining. We conclude that methylation of FHIT is a frequent event in NSCLC and breast cancers and is an important mechanism for loss of expression of this gene. Methylation of FHIT commences during lung cancer pathogenesis and may represent a marker for risk assessment.

The MUC1 gene codes for protein products that are highly expressed in human breast-cancer tissue and that serve as tumor markers for disease progression. The factors contributing to the disease-specific over-expression of the MUC1 gene are under intensive investigation and are yet to be determined. A large transcribed region of the human MUC1 gene is a CpG island that consists of 60-bp tandemly repeating units, each of which contains one SmaI restriction site. The methylation status of regulatory regions, upstream to the transcriptional start site, is essential for the regulation of gene expression. We therefore evaluated whether the methylation status of the various regions of the MUC1 gene may affect its expression. Using SmaI, and its isoschizomer XmaI endonucleases, we demonstrated that in peripheral-blood leukocytes (PBL-DNA) that do not express the MUC1 gene, the repeat array is completely methylated, whereas the same sequences are entirely non-methylated in breast-tumor-tissue DNA (BT-DNA). In contrast, sequences upstream and downstream to the repeat array showed no difference in the methylation pattern in PBL-DNA and BT-DNA. Hypomethylation within the repeat array was also observed in other epithelial tissues that express the MUC1 gene at much lower levels to those seen in breast-cancer tissue. These studies demonstrate that hypomethylation of the tandem repeat array is an absolute requirement for MUC1 gene expression in epithelial tissues, although in breast-cancer tissue additional regulatory mechanisms must pertain for its over-expression.. The MUC1 gene codes for protein products that are highly expressed in human breast-cancer tissue and that serve as tumor markers for disease progression. The factors contributing to the disease-specific over-expression of the MUC1 gene are under intensive investigation and are yet to be determined. A large transcribed region of the human MUC1 gene is a CpG island that consists of 60-bp tandemly repeating units, each of which contains one SmaI restriction site. The methylation status of regulatory regions, upstream to the transcriptional start site, is essential for the regulation of gene expression. We therefore evaluated whether the methylation status of the various regions of the MUC1 gene may affect its expression. Using SmaI, and its isoschizomer XmaI endonucleases, we demonstrated that in peripheral-blood leukocytes (PBL-DNA) that do not express the MUC1 gene, the repeat array is completely methylated, whereas the same sequences are entirely non-methylated in breast-tumor-tissue DNA (BT-DNA). In contrast, sequences upstream and downstream to the repeat array showed no difference in the methylation pattern in PBL-DNA and BT-DNA. Hypomethylation within the repeat array was also observed in other epithelial tissues that express the MUC1 gene at much lower levels to those seen in breast-cancer tissue. These studies demonstrate that hypomethylation of the tandem repeat array is an absolute requirement for MUC1 gene expression in epithelial tissues, although in breast-cancer tissue additional regulatory mechanisms must pertain for its over-expression.

