1.	Gao, F., et al., GSH2 promoter methylation in pancreatic cancer analyzed by quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Oncol Lett, 2015. 10(1)Tumor suppressor gene silencing via promoter hypermethylation is an important event in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis. Aberrant DNA hypermethylation events are highly tumor specific, and may provide a diagnostic tool for pancreatic cancer patients. The objective of the current study was to identify novel methylation-related genes that may potentially be used to establish novel therapeutic and diagnostic strategies against pancreatic cancer. The methylation status of the GS homeobox 2 (GSH2) gene was analyzed using the sodium bisulfite sequencing method. The GSH2 methylation ratio was examined in primary carcinomas and corresponding normal tissues derived from 47 patients with pancreatic cancer, using quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. Methylation ratios were found to be associated with the patient's clinicopathological features. GSH2 gene methylation was detected in 26 (55.3%) of the 47 pancreatic cancer patients, indicating that it occurs frequently in pancreatic cancer. A significant association with methylation was observed for tumor-node-metastasis stage (P=0.031). GSH2 may be a novel methylation-sensitive tumor suppressor gene in pancreatic cancer and may be a tumor-specific biomarker of the disease.
2.	Thompson, M.J., et al., Pancreatic cancer patient survival correlates with DNA methylation of pancreas development genes. PLoS One, 2015. 10(6)DNA methylation is an epigenetic mark associated with regulation of transcription and genome structure. These markers have been investigated in a variety of cancer settings for their utility in differentiating normal tissue from tumor tissue. Here, we examine the direct correlation between DNA methylation and patient survival. We find that changes in the DNA methylation of key pancreatic developmental genes are strongly associated with patient survival.
3.	Kisiel, J.B., et al., New DNA Methylation Markers for Pancreatic Cancer: Discovery, Tissue Validation, and Pilot Testing in Pancreatic Juice. Clin Cancer Res, 2015. 21(19)PURPOSE: Discriminant markers for pancreatic cancer detection are needed. We sought to identify and validate methylated DNA markers for pancreatic cancer using next-generation sequencing unbiased by known targets. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: At a referral center, we conducted four sequential case-control studies: discovery, technical validation, biologic validation, and clinical piloting. Candidate markers were identified using variance-inflated logistic regression on reduced-representation bisulfite DNA sequencing results from matched pancreatic cancers, benign pancreas, and normal colon tissues. Markers were validated technically on replicate discovery study DNA and biologically on independent, matched, blinded tissues by methylation-specific PCR. Clinical testing of six methylation candidates and mutant KRAS was performed on secretin-stimulated pancreatic juice samples from 61 patients with pancreatic cancer, 22 with chronic pancreatitis, and 19 with normal pancreas on endoscopic ultrasound. Areas under receiver-operating characteristics curves (AUC) for markers were calculated. RESULTS: Sequencing identified >500 differentially hyper-methylated regions. On independent tissues, AUC on 19 selected markers ranged between 0.73 and 0.97. Pancreatic juice AUC values for CD1D, KCNK12, CLEC11A, NDRG4, IKZF1, PKRCB, and KRAS were 0.92*, 0.88, 0.85, 0.85, 0.84, 0.83, and 0.75, respectively, for pancreatic cancer compared with normal pancreas and 0.92*, 0.73, 0.76, 0.85*, 0.73, 0.77, and 0.62 for pancreatic cancer compared with chronic pancreatitis (*, P = 0.001 vs. KRAS). CONCLUSIONS: We identified and validated novel DNA methylation markers strongly associated with pancreatic cancer. On pilot testing in pancreatic juice, best markers (especially CD1D) highly discriminated pancreatic cases from controls.
4.	Hollevoet, K., et al., Methylation-associated partial down-regulation of mesothelin causes resistance to anti-mesothelin immunotoxins in a pancreatic cancer cell line. PLoS One, 2015. 10(3)Anti-mesothelin Pseudomonas exotoxin A-based recombinant immunotoxins (RITs) present a potential treatment modality for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). To study mechanisms of resistance, the sensitive PDAC cell line KLM-1 was intermittently exposed to the anti-mesothelin SS1-LR-GGS RIT. Surviving cells were resistant to various anti-mesothelin RITs (IC50s >1 mug/ml), including the novel de-immunized RG7787. These resistant KLM-1-R cells were equally sensitive to the anti-CD71 HB21(Fv)-PE40 RIT as KLM-1, indicating resistance was specific to anti-mesothelin RITs. Mesothelin gene expression was partially down-regulated in KLM-1-R, resulting in 5-fold lower surface protein levels and decreased cellular uptake of RG7787 compared to KLM-1. Bisulfite sequencing analysis found that the mesothelin promoter region was significantly more methylated in KLM-1-R (59 +/- 3.6%) compared to KLM-1 (41 +/- 4.8%), indicating hypermethylation as a mechanism of mesothelin downregulation. The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacytidine restored original mesothelin surface expression to more than half in KLM-1-R and increased sensitivity to RG7787 (IC50 = 722.4 +/- 232.6 ng/ml), although cells remained significantly less sensitive compared to parental KLM-1 cells (IC50 = 4.41 +/- 0.38 ng/ml). Mesothelin cDNA introduction in KLM-1-R led to 5-fold higher surface protein levels and significantly higher RG7887 uptake compared to KLM-1. As a result, the original sensitivity to RG7787 was fully restored (IC50 = 4.49 +/- 1.11 ng/ml). A significantly higher RG7787 uptake was thus required to reach the original cytotoxicity in resistant cells, hinting that intracellular RIT trafficking is also a limiting factor. RNA deep sequencing analysis of KLM-1 and KLM-1-R cells supported our experimental findings; compared to KLM-1, resistant cells displayed differential expression of genes linked to intracellular transport and an expression pattern that matched a more general hypermethylation status. In conclusion, resistance to anti-mesothelin RITs in KLM-1 is linked to a methylation-associated down-regulation of mesothelin, while aberrations in RIT trafficking could also play a role.
5.	Pilarsky, C. and R. Grutzmann, Analysis of DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer: an update. Methods Mol Biol, 2015. 1238Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive tumor and the fourth common cause of cancer death in the Western world. The lack of effective therapeutic strategies is due to the late diagnosis of this disease. Methylation markers could improve early detection and help in the surveillance of PDAC after treatment. Analysis of hypermethylation in the tumor tissue might help to identify new therapeutic strategies and aid in the understanding of the pathophysiological changes occurring in pancreatic cancer. There are several methods for the detection of methylated events, but methylation-specific PCR (MSP-PCR) is the method of choice if a small number of genes will be tested in a larger set of patients samples. After isolation of the DNA by standard procedure, the DNA is then modified using sodium bisulfide.
6.	Wang, J., et al., SOCS3 methylation in synergy with Reg3A overexpression promotes cell growth in pancreatic cancer. J Mol Med (Berl), 2014. 92(12)Pancreatic cancer (PaC) is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in the world, but the molecular mechanisms for its development remain unclear. Regenerating islet-derived protein 3-alpha (Reg3A) has been reported overexpressed in pancreatic inflammation and associated with PaC malignancies, thus believed as a potential target in inflammation-linked pancreatic carcinogenesis. Silencing of suppressor of cytokine signaling SOCS3, a well-known feedback inhibitor of cell proliferation, has been found in many human cancers. Here, we identified that SOCS3 was aberrantly methylated in its CpG island in 3/5 human PaC cell lines and 11/36 cancer tissue samples. SOCS3 restoration by a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, remarkably suppressed cell proliferation and induced apoptosis of methylated PaC cells. Moreover, we also have shown that Reg3A was highly expressed in PaC cells and tissue samples. Assessment of potential relationship between SOCS3 and Reg3A aberrations in vitro revealed that SOCS3 worked downstream of Reg3A and modulated Reg3A-linked pro-tumor functions. siRNA-mediated SOCS3 knock-down in normal pancreatic epithelial cells and plasmid-transfected SOCS3 overexpression in PaC cells, respectively, resulted in the obvious promotion and inhibition of Reg3A-induced cell proliferation, thereby suggesting SOCS3 negatively regulating Reg3A-mediated PaC progression. In addition, our findings also revealed that JAK/STAT3/NF-kappaB appear involved in the effect of SOCS3-Reg3A interaction on pancreatic cell growth. In summary, SOCS3 inactivation by methylation was demonstrated to act in synergy with Reg3A overexpression to promote PaC cell growth and maybe the progress of inflammation-linked pancreatic carcinogenesis. KEY MESSAGES: Reg3A overexpression promoted cell growth in pancreatic cancer. SOCS3 is a key target in cancer by inhibiting cell growth and inducing apoptosis. SOCS3 negatively regulated Reg3A-mediated cell growth in pancreatic cancer. SOCS3 methylation act in synergy with Reg3A overexpression to promote pancreatic cancer cell growth.
7.	Nagpal, G., et al., PCMdb: pancreatic cancer methylation database. Sci Rep, 2014. 4Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most aggressive malignancy and urgently requires new biomarkers to facilitate early detection. For providing impetus to the biomarker discovery, we have developed Pancreatic Cancer Methylation Database (PCMDB, http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/pcmdb/), a comprehensive resource dedicated to methylation of genes in pancreatic cancer. Data was collected and compiled manually from published literature. PCMdb has 65907 entries for methylation status of 4342 unique genes. In PCMdb, data was compiled for both cancer cell lines (53565 entries for 88 cell lines) and cancer tissues (12342 entries for 3078 tissue samples). Among these entries, 47.22% entries reported a high level of methylation for the corresponding genes while 10.87% entries reported low level of methylation. PCMdb covers five major subtypes of pancreatic cancer; however, most of the entries were compiled for adenocarcinomas (88.38%) and mucinous neoplasms (5.76%). A user-friendly interface has been developed for data browsing, searching and analysis. We anticipate that PCMdb will be helpful for pancreatic cancer biomarker discovery.
8.	Melson, J., et al., Commonality and differences of methylation signatures in the plasma of patients with pancreatic cancer and colorectal cancer. Int J Cancer, 2014. 134(11)Profiling of DNA methylation status of specific genes is a way to screen for colorectal cancer (CRC) and pancreatic cancer (PC) in blood. The commonality of methylation status of cancer-related tumor suppressor genes between CRC and PC is largely unknown. Methylation status of 56 cancer-related genes was compared in plasma of patients in the following cohorts: CRC, PC and healthy controls. Cross validation determined the best model by area under ROC curve (AUC) to differentiate cancer methylation profiles from controls. Optimal preferential gene methylation signatures were derived to differentiate either cancer (CRC or PC) from controls. For CRC alone, a three gene signature (CYCD2, HIC and VHL) had an AUC 0.9310, sensitivity (Sens) = 0.826, specificity (Spec) = 0.9383. For PC alone, an optimal signature consisted of five genes (VHL, MYF3, TMS, GPC3 and SRBC), AUC 0.848; Sens = 0.807, Spec = 0.666. Combined PC and CRC signature or "combined cancer signature" was derived to differentiate either CRC and PC from controls (MDR1, SRBC, VHL, MUC2, RB1, SYK and GPC3) AUC = 0.8177, Sens = 0.6316 Spec = 0.840. In a validation cohort, N = 10 CRC patients, the optimal CRC signature (CYCD2, HIC and VHL) had AUC 0.900. In all derived signatures (CRC, PC and combined cancer signature) the optimal panel used preferential VHL methylation. In conclusion, CRC and PC differ in specific genes methylated in plasma other than VHL. Preferential methylation of VHL is shared in the optimal signature for CRC alone, PC alone and combined PC and CRC. Future investigations may identify additional methylation markers informative for the presence of both CRC and PC.
9.	Yi, J.M., et al., Novel methylation biomarker panel for the early detection of pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res, 2013. 19(23)PURPOSE: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths and there currently is no reliable modality for the early detection of this disease. Here, we identify cancer-specific promoter DNA methylation of BNC1 and ADAMTS1 as a promising biomarker detection strategy meriting investigation in pancreatic cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used a genome-wide pharmacologic transcriptome approach to identify novel cancer-specific DNA methylation alterations in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Of eight promising genes, we focused our studies on BNC1 and ADAMTS1 for further downstream analysis, including methylation and expression. We used a nanoparticle-enabled methylation on beads (MOB) technology to detect early-stage pancreatic cancers by analyzing DNA methylation in patient serum. RESULTS: We identified two novel genes, BNC1 (92%) and ADAMTS1 (68%), that showed a high frequency of methylation in pancreatic cancers (n = 143), up to 100% in PanIN-3 and 97% in stage I invasive cancers. Using the nanoparticle-enabled MOB technology, these alterations could be detected in serum samples (n = 42) from patients with pancreatic cancer, with a sensitivity for BNC1 of 79% [95% confidence interval (CI), 66%-91%] and for ADAMTS1 of 48% (95% CI, 33%-63%), whereas specificity was 89% for BNC1 (95% CI, 76%-100%) and 92% for ADAMTS1 (95% CI, 82%-100%). Overall sensitivity using both markers is 81% (95% CI, 69%-93%) and specificity is 85% (95% CI, 71%-99%). CONCLUSIONS: Promoter DNA methylation of BNC1 and ADAMTS1 is a potential biomarker to detect early-stage pancreatic cancers. Assaying the promoter methylation status of these genes in circulating DNA from serum is a promising strategy for early detection of pancreatic cancer and has the potential to improve mortality from this disease.
10.	Hu, B. and C.Y. Wang, [Effect of buqi tongluo jiedu recipe on HIC1 methylation level of pancreatic cancer model mice]. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi, 2013. 33(7)OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of Buqi Tongluo Jiedu Recipe (BTJR) on HIC1 methylation of pancreatic cancer mouse model. METHODS: Totally 30 nude mice were randomly divided into the normal group, the model group, and the treatment group, 10 in each group. The model was induced by cancer cell subcutaneous planting method. Mice in the treatment group were administered with BTJR (60 g crude drugs/kg, 3 mL/100 g) by gastrogavage. Equal volume of normal saline was given to those in the normal group and the model group by gastrogavage. All the intervention lasted for 14 successive days. The mice were sacrificed to death. Their tumor tissues were taken out. The HIC1 gene methylation level of each specimen was detected by nested methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (N-MSP) method. RESULTS: Compared with the model group, the HIC1 gene methylation level was lower in the treatment group (P < 0.01). Compared with the model, the HIC1 gene methylation level was even lower in the normal group (P < 0.01). CONCLUSION: BTJR could reduce HIC1 gene methylation degree of model mice, thus playing a role of molecular biologic effect in treating pancreatic cancer.
11.	Hung, S.W., et al., Pharmacological reversal of histone methylation presensitizes pancreatic cancer cells to nucleoside drugs: in vitro optimization and novel nanoparticle delivery studies. PLoS One, 2013. 8(8)We evaluated the potential of an investigational histone methylation reversal agent, 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), in improving the chemosensitivity of pancreatic cancer to nucleoside analogs (i.e., gemcitabine). DZNep brought delayed but selective cytotoxicity to pancreatic cancer cells without affecting normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells. Co-exposure of DZNep and gemcitabine induced cytotoxic additivity or synergism in both well- and poorly-differentiated pancreatic cell lines by increased apoptosis. In contrast, DZNep exerted antagonism with gemcitabine against HPDE cells with significant reduction in cytotoxicity compared with the gemcitabine-alone regimen. DZNep marginally depended on purine nucleoside transporters for its cytotoxicity, but the transport dependence was circumvented by acyl derivatization. Drug exposure studies revealed that a short priming with DZNep followed by gemcitabine treatment rather than co-treatment of both agents to produce a maximal chemosensitization response in both gemcitabine-sensitive and gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells. DZNep rapidly and reversibly decreased trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 but increased trimethylation of lysine 9 in an EZH2- and JMJD1A/2C-dependent manner, respectively. However, DZNep potentiation of nucleoside analog chemosensitization was found to be temporally coupled to trimethylation changes in lysine 27 and not lysine 9. Polymeric nanoparticles engineered to chronologically release DZNep followed by gemcitabine produced pronounced chemosensitization and dose-lowering effects. Together, our results identify that an optimized DZNep exposure can presensitize pancreatic cancer cells to anticancer nucleoside analogs through the reversal of histone methylation, emphasizing the promising clinical utilities of epigenetic reversal agents in future pancreatic cancer combination therapies.
12.	Han, X., et al., [Effect of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine on growth and methylation of RUNX3 gene in human pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaca2]. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi, 2013. 35(1)OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR) on the growth of human pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaca2 and the expression and methylation of tumor suppressor gene RUNX3. METHODS: Human pancreatic cancer cell line MiaPaca2 cells were treated with different concentrations of 5-Aza-CdR. Morphological changes of MiaPaca2 cells were observed by light microscopy. The activity of cell proliferation was analyzed by MTT assay. The changes of RUNX3 mRNA expression were detected by semi-quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Changes of RUNX3 gene methylation was detected by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: MiaPaca2 cells were treated with 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 micromo1/L 5-Aza-CdR, respectively. The inhibition rates of MiaPaca2 cells treated for 24 h were (9.17 +/- 2.15)%, (10.75 +/- 2.04)%, (12.57 +/- 1.64)% and (18.70 +/- 1.51)%, respectively. The inhibition rates were (14.94 +/- 1.68)%, (18.60 +/- 1.57)%, (22.84 +/- 1.58)% and (33.24 +/- 1.53)%, respectively, after 48 h treatment; (21.46 +/- 1.60)%, (28.62 +/- 1.72)%, (35.14 +/- 1.64)% and (45.06 +/- 1.47)%, respectively, after 72 h treatment; and (26.35 +/- 1.71)%, (34.48 +/- 1.69)%, (40.05 +/- 1.60)% and (49.99 +/- 1.61)%, respectively, after 96 h treatment. The differences between inhibition rates of each experimental and control groups (0.00 +/- 0.00)% were statistically significant (P < 0.05). At the same time, the inhibition rates of different concentration groups showed significant differences (P < 0.05). At 48 h, 72 h and 96 h, the inhibition rates of each pair concentration groups showed significant differences (P < 0.05). 5-Aza- CdR inhibited the growth of MiaPaca2 cells, and the higher the concentration, the stronger the inhibition after 24 h. 5-Aza-CdR also reversed the methylation status of RUNX3 gene, and restored the expression of RUNX3 mRNA with a dose-effect relationship. CONCLUSIONS: The methylation of RUNX3 gene is significantly related with the occurrence and development of pancreatic cancer, and abnormal methylation of RUNX3 gene may contribute to the loss of RUNX3 mRNA expression. 5-Aza-CdR may effectively cause reversion of RUNX3 methylation, and treatment with 5-Aza-CdR can reactivate the gene expression and inhibit the cell growth. This may provide a new way for diagnosis and treatment of pancreatic cancer.
13.	Zhou, W., et al., Mass spectrometric analysis reveals O-methylation of pyruvate kinase from pancreatic cancer cells. Anal Bioanal Chem, 2013. 405(14)Pyruvate kinase (PK) is an important glycolytic enzyme that catalyzes the dephosphorylation of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate. Human PK isozyme M2 (PKM2), a splice variant of M1, is overexpressed in many cancer cells, and PKM2 has been investigated as a potential tumor marker for diagnostic assays and as a target for cancer therapy. To facilitate identification and characterization of PK, we studied the enzyme from pancreatic cancer cells and normal pancreatic duct cells by electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, and identified multiple O-methylated residues from PK. These findings advance our knowledge of the biochemical properties of PK and will be important in understanding its biological function in cells.
14.	Wang, P., et al., Methylation-mediated silencing of the miR-124 genes facilitates pancreatic cancer progression and metastasis by targeting Rac1. Oncogene, 2014. 33(4)Previous studies have demonstrated that microRNA (miRNA) expression is altered in human cancer. However, the molecular mechanism underlying these changes in miRNA expression remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the epigenetic modification of miR-124 genes and the potential function of miR-124 in pancreatic cancer. Using pyrosequencing analysis, we found that miR-124 genes (including miR-124-1, miR-124-2 and miR-124-3) are highly methylated in pancreatic cancer tissues compared with in non-cancerous tissues. Hypermethylation mediated the silencing of miR-124, which was a frequent event in pancreatic duct adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Furthermore, miR-124 downregulation was significantly associated with worse survival of PDAC patients. Functional studies showed that miR-124 inhibited cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Furthermore, we characterized Rac1 as a direct target of miR-124, and miR-124 interacted with the 3'-untranslated region of Rac1, which we showed to be a putative tumor promoter in pancreatic cancer. Thus, the miR-124-mediated downregulation of Rac1 led to the inactivation of the MKK4-JNK-c-Jun pathway. Therefore, our study demonstrates that miR-124 is a tumor suppressor miRNA that is epigenetically silenced in pancreatic cancer. Our findings suggest a previously unidentified molecular mechanism involved in the progression and metastasis of pancreatic cancer.
15.	Kitamoto, S., et al., Expression of MUC17 is regulated by HIF1alpha-mediated hypoxic responses and requires a methylation-free hypoxia responsible element in pancreatic cancer. PLoS One, 2012. 7(9)MUC17 is a type 1 membrane-bound glycoprotein that is mainly expressed in the digestive tract. Recent studies have demonstrated that the aberrant overexpression of MUC17 is correlated with the malignant potential of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs); however, the exact regulatory mechanism of MUC17 expression has yet to be identified. Here, we provide the first report of the MUC17 regulatory mechanism under hypoxia, an essential feature of the tumor microenvironment and a driving force of cancer progression. Our data revealed that MUC17 was significantly induced by hypoxic stimulation through a hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha)-dependent pathway in some pancreatic cancer cells (e.g., AsPC1), whereas other pancreatic cancer cells (e.g., BxPC3) exhibited little response to hypoxia. Interestingly, these low-responsive cells have highly methylated CpG motifs within the hypoxia responsive element (HRE, 5'-RCGTG-3'), a binding site for HIF1alpha. Thus, we investigated the demethylation effects of CpG at HRE on the hypoxic induction of MUC17. Treatment of low-responsive cells with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine followed by additional hypoxic incubation resulted in the restoration of hypoxic MUC17 induction. Furthermore, DNA methylation of HRE in pancreatic tissues from patients with PDACs showed higher hypomethylation status as compared to those from non-cancerous tissues, and hypomethylation was also correlated with MUC17 mRNA expression. Taken together, these findings suggested that the HIF1alpha-mediated hypoxic signal pathway contributes to MUC17 expression, and DNA methylation of HRE could be a determinant of the hypoxic inducibility of MUC17 in pancreatic cancer cells.
16.	Wang, X., et al., The regulatory roles of miRNA and methylation on oncogene and tumor suppressor gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2012. 425(1)Carcinogenesis is driven by an accumulation of mutations and genetic lesions, which leads to activation of oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. However, the molecular mechanisms by which the expression of these genes was regulated in pancreatic cancer remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the regulatory effects of microRNA and methylation on the expression of k-ras, TP53 and PTEN genes in pancreatic cancer cells. The protein and miRNA levels were measured by Western blotting and Northern blotting, respectively. Xenograft pancreatic tumor models were established by inoculating BxPC-1, Capan-2, and Panc-1 tumor cells into athymic nu/nu mice. A disparate level of KRAS, p53, PTEN, Dnmts, and Dicer 1 proteins as well as let-7i, miR-22, miR-143, and miR-29b miRNA was observed in BxPC-1, Capan-2, and Panc-1 cells. Knockdown of Dicer 1 expression in BxPC-3 and Panc-1 cells resulted in significant increases in KRAS, p53, PTEN, and Dnmts protein levels and significant decreases in miR-22, miR-143, let-7i, and miR-29b expression. Knockdown of Dicer 1 expression in Capan-2 cells significantly increased p53 and PTEN expression, while significantly decreased miR-22 and miR-143 expression, but had no effects on PTEN, Dnmts, let-7i, and miR-29b expression. Knockdown of Dicer 1 expression significantly inhibited xenograft BxPC-3 tumor growth, but promoted xenograft Panc-1 tumor growth. In contrast, knockdown of Dicer 1 expression had no effect on xenograft Capan-2 tumor growth. Our study suggested that different pancreatic cancer cell lines exhibited obvious discrepancies in gene expression profiles, implying that different molecular mechanisms are involved in the carcinogenesis of pancreatic cancer subclasses. Our study highlighted the importance of personalized therapy.
17.	Biewusch, K., et al., DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer: protocols for the isolation of DNA and bisulfite modification. Methods Mol Biol, 2012. 863Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is an aggressive tumor and still remains a challenge for its lack of effective therapeutic strategies, which is due to the late diagnosis of this disease. Methylation markers might improve early detection and surveillance of PDAC. Furthermore, analysis of hypermethylation in the tumor tissue might help to identify new targets for therapeutic intervention and improve the understanding of the pathophysiological changes occurring in pancreatic cancer. Methylation specific PCR is the method of choice if a small number of genes will be tested in a larger set of patient samples. After DNA isolation by standard procedure, the DNA is then modified using sodium bisulfite. This DNA can then be used in qualitative and quantitative PCR assays.
18.	Kisiel, J.B., et al., Stool DNA testing for the detection of pancreatic cancer: assessment of methylation marker candidates. Cancer, 2012. 118(10)BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer (PanC) presents at late stage with high mortality. Effective early detection methods are needed. Aberrantly methylated genes are unexplored as markers for noninvasive detection by stool testing. The authors aimed to select discriminant methylated genes and to assess accuracy of these and mutant KRAS in stool to detect PanC. METHODS: Nine target genes were assayed by real-time methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in bisulfite-treated DNA from microdissected frozen specimens of 24 PanC cases and 30 normal colon controls. Archived stools from 58 PanC cases and 65 controls matched on sex, age, and smoking were analyzed. Target genes from fecal supernatants were enriched by hybrid capture, bisulfite-treated, and assayed by MSP. KRAS mutations were assayed using the QuARTS technique. RESULTS: Areas under the receiver operating characteristics curves (AUCs) for tissue BMP3, NDRG4, EYA4, UCHL1, MDFI, Vimentin, CNTNAP2, SFRP2, and TFPI2 were 0.90, 0.79, 0.78, 0.78, 0.77, 0.77, 0.69, 0.67, and 0.66, respectively. The top 4 markers and mutant KRAS were evaluated in stool. BMP3 was the most discriminant methylation marker in stool. At 90% specificity, methylated BMP3 alone detected 51% of PanCs, mutant KRAS detected 50%, and combination detected 67%. AUCs for methylated BMP3, mutant KRAS, and combination in stool were 0.73, 0.75, and 0.85, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that stool assay of a methylated gene marker can detect PanC. Among candidate methylated markers discriminant in tissue, BMP3 alone performed well in stool. Combining methylated BMP3 and mutant KRAS increased stool detection over either marker alone.
19.	Dey, P., et al., Human RNA polymerase II-association factor 1 (hPaf1/PD2) regulates histone methylation and chromatin remodeling in pancreatic cancer. PLoS One, 2011. 6(10)Change in gene expression associated with pancreatic cancer could be attributed to the variation in histone posttranslational modifications leading to subsequent remodeling of the chromatin template during transcription. However, the interconnected network of molecules involved in regulating such processes remains elusive. hPaf1/PD2, a subunit of the human PAF-complex, involved in the regulation of transcriptional elongation has oncogenic potential. Our study explores the possibility that regulation of histone methylation by hPaf1 can contribute towards alteration in gene expression by nucleosomal rearrangement. Here, we show that knockdown of hPaf1/PD2 leads to decreased di- and tri-methylation at histone H3 lysine 4 residues in pancreatic cancer cells. Interestingly, hPaf1/PD2 colocalizes with MLL1 (Mixed Lineage Leukemia 1), a histone methyltransferase that methylates H3K4 residues. Also, a reduction in hPaf1 level resulted in reduced MLL1 expression and a corresponding decrease in the level of CHD1 (Chromohelicase DNA-binding protein 1), an ATPase dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme that specifically binds to H3K4 di and trimethyl marks. hPaf1/PD2 was also found to interact and colocalize with CHD1 in both cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts of pancreatic cancer cells. Further, reduced level of CHD1 localization in the nucleus in hPaf1/PD2 Knockdown cells could be rescued by ectopic expression of hPaf1/PD2. Micrococcal nuclease digestion showed an altered chromatin structure in hPaf1/PD2-KD cells. Overall, our results suggest that hPaf1/PD2 in association with MLL1 regulates methylation of H3K4 residues, as well as interacts and regulates nuclear shuttling of chromatin remodeling protein CHD1, facilitating its function in pancreatic cancer cells.
20.	Chen, M., et al., Expression and promoter methylation analysis of ATP-binding cassette genes in pancreatic cancer. Oncol Rep, 2012. 27(1)We investigated the relationship of ABCB1/MDR1, ABCC1/MRP1 and ABCG2/BCRP expression and promoter methylation with pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis and drug resistance. Gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells, SW1990/GZ (33.3-fold increased resistance), were obtained by treating SW1990 cells with gemcitabine. The expression of ABCB1/MDR1, ABCC1/MRP1 and ABCG2/BCRP was determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR in the cell lines, 3 normal pancreatic tissues, 15 human pancreatic cancer samples and 15 adjacent tissues. Promoter methylation was determined in cell lines by bisulfite genomic sequencing. ABCB1/MDR1, ABCC1/MRP1 and ABCG2/BCRP were upregulated in SW1990 and SW1990/GZ compared with normal pancreatic tissue, and expression in SW1990/GZ was significantly higher than in SW1990 cells. ABCB1/MDR1, ABCC1/MRP1 and ABCG2/BCRP were upregulated in pancreatic cancer tissues, compared to adjacent tissues. The ABCB1/MDR1, ABCC1/MRP1 and ABCG2/BCRP promoter were hypomethylated in all the cell lines. ABCB1/MDR1, ABCC1/MRP1 and ABCG2/BCRP expression correlated with pancreatic cancer tumorigenesis and drug resistance in a mechanism that is independent of promoter methylation.
21.	Zhang, S., et al., Downregulation of miR-132 by promoter methylation contributes to pancreatic cancer development. Carcinogenesis, 2011. 32(8)MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which regulate gene expression by partial complementarity to the 3' untranslated region of their target genes, have been implicated in cancer initiation and progression. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the regulation of miRNA expression during pancreatic tumorigenesis has not been extensively reported. In this study, we first compared the miRNA expression in human pancreatic cancers and adjacent normal tissues by miRNA array and identified 12 differentially expressed miRNAs. miR-132, which is downregulated in tumors, was further studied in greater detail. Decreased expression of miR-132 was confirmed in 16 of 20 pancreatic carcinomas (P < 0.0001), compared with their respective benign tissues by TaqMan miRNA assays. miR-132 expression was remarkably influenced by promoter methylation in PANC1 and SW1990 cells. Promoter hypermethylation was observed in tumor samples but not in the normal counterparts, and the expression of miR-132 negatively correlated with its methylation status (P = 0.013). miR-132 was transcribed by RNA polymerase II, and Sp1 played a major role in miR-132 transcription. The expression of Sp1 correlated with that of miR-132 in tissues. Moreover, cancerous tissues showed significantly lower Sp1-binding affinity to the miR-132 promoter, relative to non-tumor samples. Proliferation and colony formation of pancreatic cancer cells were suppressed in cells transfected with miR-132 mimics and enhanced in cells transfected with miR-132 inhibitor by negatively regulating the Akt-signaling pathway. Our present findings illustrate the mechanism driving miR-132 downregulation and the important role of miR-132 in pancreatic cancer development.
22.	Li, M. and Z.W. Zhao, Clinical implications of mismatched repair gene promoter methylation in pancreatic cancer. Med Oncol, 2012. 29(2)To investigate the relationship between the hypermethylation statuses of the mismatch repair genes (hMLH1 and hMSH2) promoters and explore the correlation between it and the development of pancreatic cancer and the biological behavior of pancreatic cancer. We selected 90 patients who were diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and underwent radical operations in the First Affiliated Hospital of the Dalian Medical University between January 2002 and June 2008. The methylation status of the hMLH1 and hMSH2 promoters was detected by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP). Meanwhile, the expression of hMLH1 and hMSH2 protein was detected by Western blot and immunohistochemistry, and its correlation with biological behavior of pancreatic cancer was explored. Of the 90 cases, hMLH1 promoter methylation was detected in 54 (60.0%) patients, while none of the paracancerous tissues indicated methylation. In the study, the hMLH1-methylated tumors lost hMLH1 protein expression, but the non-hMLH1-methylated tumors were not seen to have a loss of hMLH1 protein expression (P < 0.001). On the other hand, there were four cases of hMSH2 promoter methylation. However, no significant difference was found between hMSH2 promoter methylation and non-hMSH2 promoter methylation cases (P > 0.05). After universal analysis, hMLH1 expression was significantly related to tumor differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and tumor location (P < 0.05) while not related to the age, sex, and tumor size (P > 0.05). Our study suggests that the mismatch repair genes play an important role in pancreatic cancer carcinogenesis and progression through epigenetic modification, and it may be regarded as a potential target for the management of pancreatic cancer.
23.	Yang, H., et al., Imprinted tumor suppressor gene ARHI induces apoptosis correlated with changes in DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer cells. Mol Med Rep, 2010. 3(4)Aplesia Ras homologue member I (ARHI, DIRAS3) is a Ras-related imprinted growth inhibitory gene whose expression is down-regulated in the majority of breast and ovarian cancers. This study investigated the inhibitory function of ARHI in pancreatic cancer. Six pancreatic cancer cell lines, tumor xenografts in nude mice and 20 pancreatic cancer tissue sections were analyzed. ARHI is widely expressed in ductal and acinar cells of normal pancreatic tissue, but is down-regulated or lost in approximately 50% of pancreatic cancers. Aberrant methylation of the ARHI locus was found in five pancreatic cancer cell lines, which exhibited down-regulation or loss of ARHI expression. Hypermethylation was detected in five cell lines (5/5, 100%) at CpG island I, in two cell lines (2/5, 40%) at CpG island II and in four cell lines (4/5, 80%) at CpG island III. Re-expression of ARHI significantly inhibited the growth of pancreatic cancer cells. This inhibition was associated with the induction of apoptosis. Treatment with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) restored ARHI mRNA expression, inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in PANC-1 and P3 human pancreatic cancer cells in culture. In nu/nu mice, 5-aza-dC also inhibited the growth of PANC-1 xenografts and induced apoptosis, as observed by TUNEL staining. These effects were associated with the re-expression of ARHI protein. Therefore, ARHI may serve as a growth inhibitory gene in a significant fraction of pancreatic cancers. Re-expression of ARHI significantly induced the apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells. A demethylation agent reduced human pancreatic cancer cell line growth in conjunction with ARHI re-expression.
24.	Pedersen, K.S., et al., Leukocyte DNA methylation signature differentiates pancreatic cancer patients from healthy controls. PLoS One, 2011. 6(3)Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PaC) is one of most difficult tumors to treat. Much of this is attributed to the late diagnosis. To identify biomarkers for early detection, we examined DNA methylation differences in leukocyte DNA between PaC cases and controls in a two-phase study. In phase I, we measured methylation levels at 1,505 CpG sites in treatment-naive leukocyte DNA from 132 never-smoker PaC patients and 60 never-smoker healthy controls. We found significant differences in 110 CpG sites (false discovery rate <0.05). In phase II, we tested and validated 88 of 96 phase I selected CpG sites in 240 PaC cases and 240 matched controls (p</=0.05). Using penalized logistic regression, we built a prediction model consisting of five CpG sites (IL10_P348, LCN2_P86, ZAP70_P220, AIM2_P624, TAL1_P817) that discriminated PaC patients from controls (C-statistic = 0.85 in phase I; 0.76 in phase II). Interestingly, one CpG site (LCN2_P86) alone could discriminate resectable patients from controls (C-statistic= 0.78 in phase I; 0.74 in phase II). We also performed methylation quantitative trait loci (methQTL) analysis and identified three CpG sites (AGXT_P180_F, ALOX12_E85_R, JAK3_P1075_R) where the methylation levels were significantly associated with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (false discovery rate <0.05). Our results demonstrate that epigenetic variation in easily obtainable leukocyte DNA, manifested by reproducible methylation differences, may be used to detect PaC patients. The methylation differences at certain CpG sites are partially attributable to genetic variation. This study strongly supports future epigenome-wide association study using leukocyte DNA for biomarker discovery in human diseases.
25.	Ito, T., et al., Transcriptional regulation of claudin-18 via specific protein kinase C signaling pathways and modification of DNA methylation in human pancreatic cancer cells. J Cell Biochem, 2011. 112(7)Since claudin-18 (Cldn18) is overexpressed in precursor lesion PanIN and pancreatic duct carcinoma, it serves as a diagnostic marker and a target of immunotherapy. The stomach isoform of Cldn18, Cldn18a2 is regulated via a PKC/MAPK/AP-1-dependent pathway in PKC activator 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA)-stimulated gastric cancer cells. However, little is known about how Cldn18 is regulated, not only in pancreatic duct carcinoma but also in normal human pancreatic duct epithelial cells (HPDE cells). In the present study, four pancreatic cancer cell lines, HPAF-II, HPAC, PANC-1 and BXPC3, and hTERT-HPDE cells in which the hTERT gene was introduced into HPDE cells in primary culture, were treated with TPA. In all human pancreatic cancer cell lines and hTERT-HPDE cells, Cldn18 mRNA indicated as Cldn18a2 was markedly induced by TPA and in well- or moderately differentiated human pancreatic cancer cells HPAF-II and HPAC and hTERT-HPDE cells, the protein was also strongly increased. The upregulation of Cldn18 by TPA in human pancreatic cancer cell lines was prevented by inhibitors of PKCdelta, PKCepsilon, and PKCalpha, whereas the upregulation of Cldn18 by TPA in hTERT-HPDE cells was prevented by inhibitors of PKCdelta, PKCtheta, and PKCalpha. Furthermore, a CpG island was identified within the coding sequence of the Cldn18 gene and treatment with the demethylating agent 5-azadeoxycytidine enhanced upregulation of Cldn18 by TPA in HPAF-II and HPAC, but not hTERT-HPDE cells. Our findings suggest that in human pancreatic cancer cells, Cldn18 is primarily regulated at the transcriptional level via specific PKC signaling pathways and modified by DNA methylation.
26.	Cai, H.H., et al., Aberrant methylation frequency of TNFRSF10C promoter in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int, 2011. 10(1)BACKGROUND: A growing body of evidence suggests that many tumors are initiated by both epigenetic abnormalities and gene mutations, which promote tumor progression. Epigenetic abnormalities include changes in DNA methylation and in the modification of histones. This study aimed to assess the status of methylation in the CpG island (CGI) of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 10c (TNFRSF10C) with combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA) and to evaluate its role in the progression of pancreatic cancer (PC). METHODS: The methylation status of four PC cell lines was assessed using COBRA and/or bisulfite genomic sequencing (BGS). Changes in methylation and TNFRSF10C expression in PC cell lines before and after treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) and/or trichostatin A (TSA) were assessed by BGS and real-time RT-PCR. Apoptosis in the four cell lines was tested by flow cytometry (FCM) and TUNEL assay. RESULTS: The methylation status of the TNFRSF10C promoter was assessed in PC cells (BxPC-3: 68.84+/-8.71%; CFPAC-1: 0; PANC-1: 96.77+/-4.57%; SW1990: 54.97+/-7.33%) with the COBRA assay, which was confirmed by the results of BGS. After treatment with 5-aza-dC and/or TSA, apoptosis was induced in PC cells to different degrees, and the levels of TNFRSF10C transcriptional expression in the PC cell lines (except CFPAC-1) increased markedly after 5-aza-dC treatment. CONCLUSIONS: A high frequency of CGI methylation in the TNFRSF10C promoter results in inactivation of the gene and enhancement of tumor growth in most PC cell lines (except CFPAC-1). Inactivation of TNFRSF10C by CGI hypermethylation can play an important role in PC progression and be potentially useful as a diagnostic marker and a new therapeutic approach for PC.
27.	Ramachandran, K., et al., Methylation-mediated silencing of TMS1 in pancreatic cancer and its potential contribution to chemosensitivity. Anticancer Res, 2010. 30(10)BACKGROUND: Resistance to chemotherapeutic agents, resulting in part from epigenetic silencing of pro-apoptotic genes, is one of the causes of treatment failure of pancreatic cancer. We examined whether epigenetic silencing of target of methylation induced silencing 1 (TMS1) contributes to resistance to chemotherapy in pancreatic cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methylation analysis was performed by methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and gene expression was analyzed by quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR). MIA PaCa-2 cells were transfected with pCMV6-XL5/TMS1 plasmid and the effect of TMS1 expression on sensitivity to gemcitabine and docetaxel was determined. Cell viability was measured using Cell Titer Blue assay. RESULTS: TMS1 expression was repressed in MIA PaCa-2 cells by DNA methylation. Up-regulation of TMS1 by recombinant gene expression in MIA PaCa-2 cells or by pre-treatment of these cells with 5-azacytidine resulted in enhanced sensitivity to gemcitabine and docetaxel. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that TMS1 is a potential therapeutic target in pancreatic cancer.
28.	Gao, J., et al., Methylation of the SPARC gene promoter and its clinical implication in pancreatic cancer. J Exp Clin Cancer Res, 2010. 29BACKGROUND: The secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) plays a pivotal role in regulating cell-matrix interactions and tumor angiogenesis, proliferation, and migration. Detection of SPARC gene methylation may be useful as a tumorigenesis marker for early detection of pancreatic cancer. METHODS: Methylation of the SPARC gene transcriptional regulation region (TRR) was detected using bisulfite-specific (BSP) PCR-based sequencing analysis in 40 cases of pancreatic cancer and the adjacent normal tissues, 6 chronic pancreatitis tissues, and 6 normal pancreatic tissues. BSP cloning-based sequencing analysis was also performed in selected cases. Clinicopathological data from the cancer patients were collected and analyzed. RESULTS: Analysis of SPARC gene TRR methylation showed two hypermethylation wave peak regions: CpG Region 1 (CpG site 1-7) and CpG Region 2 (CpG site 8-12). Pancreatic tissues have shown methylation in both regions with gradual increases from normal, chronic pancreatitis, and adjacent normal tissues to cancerous tissues. However, Methylation of CpG Region 2 was more sensitive than CpG Region 1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the methylation level of CpG Region 2 was associated with increased tumor size and exposure to the risk factors (tobacco smoke and alcohol consumption) for developing pancreatic cancer. CONCLUSION: Methylation of the SPARC gene, specifically CpG Region 2, may be an early event during pancreatic tumorigenesis and should be further evaluated as a tumorigenesis marker for early detection of pancreatic cancer.
29.	Liggett, T., et al., Differential methylation of cell-free circulating DNA among patients with pancreatic cancer versus chronic pancreatitis. Cancer, 2010. 116(7)BACKGROUND: : Although patients with chronic pancreatitis (CP) have an increased risk of pancreatic cancer (PanCa), the timely detection of PanCa often is difficult, because the symptoms of CP and PanCa are very similar. Moreover, secondary inflammation may be identified in PanCa, further complicating diagnosis. To improve the survival of patients with PanCa, a reliable test to differentiate CP from PanCa is needed. In this article, the authors describe a methylation profile of cell-free plasma DNA that distinguished CP from PanCa with >90% accuracy. METHODS: : Methylation in cell-free, plasma DNA was compared among 30 samples from patients with CP, 30 samples from patients with PanCa, and 30 samples from healthy controls (N) using a microarray-mediated methylation analysis of 56 fragments in each sample (MethDet56). Statistical analysis was done by using the Fisher exact test, a naive Bayes algorithm, and 25 rounds of 5-fold cross-validation. RESULTS: : The MethDet56 methylation analysis technique identified 17 gene promoters as informative (8 for distinguishing N from CP and 14 for distinguishing CP from PanCa). It achieved 81.7% sensitivity and 78% specificity (P<.01) in the detection of CP (N vs CP) and 91.2% sensitivity and 90.8% specificity (P<.01) in the differential detection of PanCa (PanCa vs CP). CONCLUSIONS: : The current data suggested that, among patients with pancreatic disease, the methylation profiles of inflammatory disease and cancer are different and open a new venue for the development of biomarkers for differential diagnosis. Further investigation of diagnostic biomarkers for pancreatic cancer based on methylation in cell-free, circulating DNA appears to be warranted. Cancer 2010. (c) 2010 American Cancer Society.
30.	Qiu, W. and G. Su, Refining methylation-targeting therapies for pancreatic cancer-focusing on DNMT1. Cancer Biol Ther, 2010. 9(4)
31.	Tan, A.C., et al., Characterizing DNA methylation patterns in pancreatic cancer genome. Mol Oncol, 2009. 3(5-6)We performed a global methylation profiling assay on 1505 CpG sites across 807 genes to characterize DNA methylation patterns in pancreatic cancer genome. We found 289 CpG sites that were differentially methylated in normal pancreas, pancreatic tumors and cancer cell lines. We identified 23 and 35 candidate genes that are regulated by hypermethylation and hypomethylation in pancreatic cancer, respectively. We also identified candidate methylation markers that alter the expression of genes critical to gemcitabine susceptibility in pancreatic cancer. These results indicate that aberrant DNA methylation is a frequent epigenetic event in pancreatic cancer; and by using global methylation profiling assay, it is possible to identify these markers for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes in this disease.
32.	Kumari, A., et al., Positive regulation of human telomerase reverse transcriptase gene expression and telomerase activity by DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg Oncol, 2009. 16(4)AIM: We sought to determine the role of telomerase and its catalytic subunit hTERT in pancreatic cancer and evaluate the epigenetic regulation of hTERT by promoter methylation. METHODS: Thirty paired samples of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas and adjacent normal tissue and 12 chronic pancreatitis samples were studied. Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, telomeric repeat amplification protocol assay, and methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction were performed to analyze hTERT expression, telomerase activity, and methylation status of gene promoters, respectively. RESULT: hTERT and telomerase activity were upregulated in pancreatic cancer compared with paired normal tissues and samples of pancreatitis. hTERT expression correlated with telomerase activity (P \ .05) and in turn correlated positively with hTERT promoter methylation (P \ .001) and p16 promoter methylation. hTERT transcript expression and telomerase activity both conferred a worse outcome by univariate and multivariate analysis (P \ .05). CONCLUSION: hTERT expression and telomerase activity are predictors of poor outcome in pancreatic cancer. hTERT gene expression is positively regulated by promoter methylation.
33.	Melnikov, A.A., et al., Methylation profile of circulating plasma DNA in patients with pancreatic cancer. J Surg Oncol, 2009. 99(2)BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Detection of pancreatic cancer by blood-based test may improve outcomes. We sought to establish the feasibility of a blood-based detection of pancreatic cancer through multiplexed array-mediated analysis of DNA methylation. METHODS: Methylation was assessed in each plasma sample using a panel of 56 frequently methylated genes. Methylation profiles in patients with ductal cell adenocarcinoma of the pancreas (n = 30) and healthy gender and age-matched controls (n = 30) were compared. Methylation was determined as described previously; a composite biomarker was developed for classification of cancer and normal samples. Sensitivity and specificity of the biomarker were estimated using 25 rounds of fivefold cross-validation. RESULTS: Five promoters were consistently selected for the classifier during cross-validation and comprised the final composite biomarker Five-fold cross-validation results indicate 76% sensitivity and 59% specificity of the biomarker, which included promoters of CCND2, SOCS1, THBS1, PLAU, and VHL. CONCLUSION: Differential methylation profiling of plasma DNA can detect ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas with significant accuracy and should be explored further. While additional improvement of biomarkers is necessary, the blood-based biomarker may be already useful as a first-line detection tool.
34.	Zhang, M.L., et al., Correlation between ECT2 gene expression and methylation change of ECT2 promoter region in pancreatic cancer. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int, 2008. 7(5)BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is closely related to epigenetic abnormality. The epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 gene (ECT2) plays a critical role in Rho activation during cytokinesis, and thus may play a role in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. In this study, we investigated the relationships between aberrant expression and epigenetic changes of the ECT2 gene in pancreatic cancer. METHODS: Four cell lines (PANC-1, Colo357, T3M-4 and PancTuI) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) tissues were used for mRNA detection. After restriction isoschizomer endonucleases (MspI/HpaII) were used to digest the DNA sequence (5'-CCGG-3'), PCR was made to amplify the product. And RT-PCR was applied to determine the expression of the gene. RESULTS: The mRNA expression of the ECT2 gene was higher in pancreatic tumor tissue than in normal tissue. The gene was also expressed in the 4 PDAC cell lines. The methylation states of the upstream regions of the ECT2 gene were almost identical in normal, tumor pancreatic tissues, and the 4 PDAC cell lines. Some of the 5'-CCGG-3' areas in the upstream region of ECT2 were methylated, while others were unmethylated. CONCLUSIONS: The oncogene ECT2 is overexpressed in pancreatic tumor tissues as verified by RT-PCR detection. The methylation status of DNA in promoter areas is involved in the gene expression, along with other factors, in pancreatic cancer.
35.	Yamada, N., et al., MUC2 expression is regulated by histone H3 modification and DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer. Int J Cancer, 2006. 119(8)Mucins are highly glycosylated proteins that play important roles in carcinogenesis. In pancreatic neoplasia, MUC2 mucin has been demonstrated as a tumor suppressor and we have reported that MUC2 is a favorable prognostic factor. Regulation of MUC2 gene expression is known to be controlled by DNA methylation, but the role of histone modification for MUC2 gene expression has yet to be clarified. Herein, we provide the first report that the histone H3 modification of the MUC2 promoter region regulates MUC2 gene expression. To investigate the histone modification and DNA methylation of the promoter region of the MUC2 gene, we treated 2 human pancreatic cancer cell lines, PANC1 (MUC2-negative) and BxPC3 (MUC2-positive) with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacytidine (5-aza), the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA), and a combination of these agents. The DNA methylation level of PANC1 cells was decreased by all 3 treatments, whereas histone H3-K4/K9 methylation and H3-K9/K27 acetylation in PANC1 cells was changed to the level in BxPC3 cells by treatment with TSA alone and with the 5-aza/TSA combination. The expression level of MUC2 mRNA in PANC1 cells exhibited a definite increase when treated with TSA and 5-aza/TSA, whereas 5-aza alone induced only a slight increase. Our results suggest that histone H3 modification in the 5' flanking region play an important role in MUC2 gene expression, possibly affecting DNA methylation. An understanding of these intimately correlated epigenetic changes may be of importance for predicting the outcome of patients with pancreatic neoplasms.
36.	Hamada, T., et al., Mapping of the methylation pattern of the MUC2 promoter in pancreatic cancer cell lines, using bisulfite genomic sequencing. Cancer Lett, 2005. 227(2)Expression of the MUC2 gene is controlled by the methylation of CpG sites in the promoter region, but the detailed methylation status of this region has yet to be reported. We have mapped the complete methylation status of the MUC2 promoter from position -1989 to position +288 upstream, a region that contains 59 CpG sites, using bisulfite genomic sequencing in two pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC1, BxPC3) and in isolated normal colon crypts as a control. The MUC2 promoter in PANC1, a cell line that does not express MUC2, was highly methylated (average 87%, complete methylation at 28 of the 59 CpG sites), while the promoter region in the MUC2-expressing BxPC3 cell line (average 43%, complete methylation at 2 of 59 CpG sites) and in MUC2-expressing normal colon crypts (average 33%, no CpG site was completely methylated) were only partially methylated (P<0.0001). 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment of PANC1 cells reduced the methylation level (average 36%) and induced MUC2 mRNA expression. However, mRNA expression of AP2, SP1 and CDX2 was not affected by this treatment. Our data provide the first detailed methylation map of the MUC2 promoter region for the first time, using the conversion-specific bisulfite genomic sequencing. Previously unproven methylation sites were detected, and some AP2 and SP1 binding sites showed different methylation levels among PANC1, BxPC3 and colonic crypt cells. Our mapping data provide an essential basis for further studies of methylation-regulated MUC2 inactivation.
37.	Hanaoka, M., et al., Cloning of the hamster p16 gene 5' upstream region and its aberrant methylation patterns in pancreatic cancer. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2005. 333(4)The hamster model of pancreatic carcinogenesis is useful for understanding the development of human pancreatic cancer. However, there is only a small amount of hamster genetic information available for analyzing the gene alterations in hamster pancreatic cancers. Here, we determined the nucleotide sequence of the 5' upstream region of the hamster p16 gene using a suppression polymerase chain reaction method combined with gene-specific primers. Based on this sequence, we analyzed the methylation status of the 5' region by bisulfite sequencing in three normal pancreatic tissues and five pancreatic duct adenocarcinomas (PDAs). All five PDAs were highly methylated in the 5' upstream region and showed reduced expressions of the p16 gene, while the three normal samples were demethylated. The method described in this study is a highly effective and rapid technique for determining the 5' upstream region, and is applicable to epigenetic studies of the methylation status of this region.
38.	Sato, N., et al., The chemokine receptor CXCR4 is regulated by DNA methylation in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Biol Ther, 2005. 4(1)Despite the biological and clinical importance of the interaction between the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and its ligand CXCL12 (SDF-1alpha) in human cancers, little is known about transcriptional regulation of the CXCR4 gene. Although aberrant hypermethylation in cancer has been described typically in genes with tumor-suppressor properties, this epigenetic alteration has also been observed to affect potential cancer-promoting genes. We now demonstrate that DNA methylation influences CXCR4 expression in human pancreatic cancer. Gene expression profiling and reverse transcription-PCR identified a significant proportion of pancreatic cancer cell lines that displayed little or no CXCR4 mRNA expression. Using methylation-specific PCR, combined bisulfite restriction analysis, and bisulfite sequencing, we found the 5' CpG islands of the CXCR4 gene to be unmethylated in normal pancreas, whereas promoter hypermethylation was detected in 45% (9 of 20) of pancreatic cancer cell lines and in 46% (46 of 100) of primary pancreatic adenocarcinomas. There was a significant inverse correlation between methylation and mRNA expression level of CXCR4 (P=0.008) in a large panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines. Constitutive as well as inducible expression of CXCR4 could be restored in methylated cell lines pharmacologically using epigenetic modifying drugs. These findings demonstrate the first evidence for epigenetic regulation of CXCR4 in human cancers, providing new insights into the role of CXCR4/CXCL12 interactions in tumor progression.
39.	Sakai, M., et al., Frequent promoter methylation and gene silencing of CDH13 in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Sci, 2004. 95(7)It has recently been reported that CDH13 expression is silenced by aberrant methylation of the promoter region in several cancers. We examined the methylation status of the CDH13 gene in pancreatic cancer using methylation-specific PCR (MSP), and detected aberrant methylation of CDH13 in all 6 pancreatic cancer cell lines examined. To confirm the status of the CDH13 gene in relation to the methylation pattern, we next examined CDH13 expression in these cell lines using reverse transcription (RT)-PCR. As expected, no CDH13 expression was detected in any of the 6 pancreatic cancer cell lines. Moreover, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) treatment of CDH13-methylated cell lines led to restoration of CDH13 expression. Among primary pancreatic cancers, 19 of 33 (58%) cases exhibited CDH13 methylation, while no cases exhibited it in corresponding normal pancreatic tissues. CDH13 methylation was detected even in relatively early pancreatic cancers, such as stage II cancers and cancers less than 2 cm in diameter. Our results suggest that the aberrant methylation of CDH13 occurs frequently in pancreatic cancer, even at a relatively early stage.
40.	Matsubayashi, H., et al., Methylation of cyclin D2 is observed frequently in pancreatic cancer but is also an age-related phenomenon in gastrointestinal tissues. Clin Cancer Res, 2003. 9(4)PURPOSE: Hypermethylation of CpG islands in the promoters of selected genes is a common feature of neoplasia. Aberrant methylation of cyclin D2 has been observed in several cancers. We investigated the methylation of cyclin D2 in aging and pancreatic neoplastic development, and the utility of cyclin D2 methylation as a marker of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Methylation-specific PCR was performed on DNA from 165 resected pancreatic exocrine neoplasms [109 adenocarcinomas, 46 intraductal papillary-mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), and 10 mucinous cystic neoplasms], 14 pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms, 13 microdissected-normal pancreatic ductal epithelia, 25 normal pancreatic parenchyma, 51 specimens of pancreatic juice obtained perioperatively, 15 pancreatic cancer xenografts, 22 pancreatic cancer cell lines, 59 specimens of normal duodenum, and 49 gallbladders affected by cholecystitis. Cyclin D2 RNA expression was determined in pancreatic cancer cell lines, before and after 5-AZA-2'-deoxycytidine treatment, by reverse transcription-PCR. RESULTS: Methylation of cyclin D2 was identified in 65.1% (71 of 109) of primary pancreatic adenocarcinomas, in 50% (23 of 46) of IPMNs, and in 70% (7 of 10) of mucinous cystic neoplasms, but was detected infrequently in microdissected samples of normal pancreatic epithelia [7.7% (1 of 13)] and in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasms [14.3% (2 of 14)]. Cyclin D2 methylation was also recognized in 10 of 15 (66.7%) pancreatic cancer xenografts and in 19 of 22 (86.4%) pancreatic cancer cell lines. All of 10 pancreatic cancer cell lines completely methylated at cyclin D2 showed no expression by reverse transcription-PCR. Four of these 10 cell lines were treated with 5-AZA-2'-deoxycytidine, and all 4 showed increased RNA expression of cyclin D2 after treatment. In pancreatic juice, cyclin D2 methylation was detected in 9 of 22 (40.9%) samples from patients with pancreatic cancer and in 6 of 9 (66.7%) patients with IPMNs, but in none of 20 non-neoplastic controls, respectively (P = 0.0013 and P < 0.0001, respectively). Methylation of cyclin D2 was also observed more in non-neoplastic tissues and with increasing age (P = 0.041 in the pancreas, P = 0.047 in the duodenum, and P = 0.0008 in the gallbladder). CONCLUSIONS: The promoter region of cyclin D2 undergoes age-related methylation in multiple tissues, but aberrant methylation is more often detected in tissues and juice samples of pancreatic cancer than in normal tissues. The detection of cyclin D2 methylation in pancreatic juice may aid in the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
41.	Fukushima, N., et al., Diagnosing pancreatic cancer using methylation specific PCR analysis of pancreatic juice. Cancer Biol Ther, 2003. 2(1)The aim of this study was to determine the utility of detecting methylated ppENK and pi6 in pancreatic juice by methylation specific PCR as a marker of pancreatic adeno-carcinoma. Pancreatic juice samples were collected either intraoperatively, from 92 patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy for benign (n=20) and malignant periampullary disease (n = 72) or endoscopically (by duodenal aspiration after secretin infusion), from 13 patients undergoing investigation for pancreatic disease. Methylated ppENK was detected in the pancreatic juice of 30 (66.7%) of 45 patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, in 4 (44.4%) of 9 patients with intraductal papillary-mucinous adenocarcinoma, and in 7 (41.2%) of 17 patients with other periampullary carcinomas, using methylation specific PCR. Methylated pi6 was detected in a lower percentage of these patients (11.1%, 11.1% and 23.5%, respectively). In contrast, methylated ppENK and pi6 were not detected in 20 patients with non-malignant periampullary disease including 12 patients with chronic pancreatitis. Methylated ppENK was detected in 30 of 33 (90.9%) primary pancreatic adenocarcinoma and methylated pi6 was in 6/33 (1 8.2%). Despite the absence of ppENKand pi6 methylation in normal pancreas, methylated ppENK and pi6 was present in the duodenum of 90.5% and 28.6%, respectively of patients without cancer. Further, methylated ppENK and pi6 was seen in 88.9% and 11.1%, respectively of pancreatic juice samples obtained by duodenal aspiration from patients without cancer. We conclude that since ppENK and pi6 are not normally methylated in pancreatic secretions, detection of methylated ppENK and pi6 in pure pancreatic juice obtained by direct cannulation of the pancreatic duct to avoid duodenal secretions may suggest the presence of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
42.	Ho, J.J., et al., Methylation status of promoters and expression of MUC2 and MUC5AC mucins in pancreatic cancer cells. Int J Oncol, 2003. 22(2)Anomalous expression of certain types of mucins occurs in pancreatic tumors, but little is known about the causes. MUC2 and MUC5AC are not expressed in normal pancreas. In the present study an immunohistochemical screening showed that MUC2 antigen was expressed in 6% of invasive tumors. Of the pancreatic cell lines, 2.4% expressed MUC2 message and antigen. In contrast, MUC5AC antigen was expressed in 86-100% of invasive adenocarcinoma (depending on the antibody). MUC5AC message and antigen were expressed in 66.7% of the cell lines tested. A polymerase chain reaction based assay was used to determine if methylation of CpG sites immediately 5' of the transcription initiation sites of the MUC2 and MUC5AC genes could be related to mucin expression in the cell lines. Digestibility by the methylation sensitive restriction enzyme HpaII correlated with the presence or absence of mRNA in 100% and 77.8% of the cell lines for MUC2 and MUC5AC, respectively. Treatment of a cell line that did not express MUC2 or MUC5AC gene products with the DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine resulted in an increase in MUC2 message but no change in MUC5AC message. In summary, the expression of MUC2 gene products correlated well with methylation of the proximal region of the promoter whereas expression of MUC5AC may involve additional regions or other mechanisms.
43.	Fleming, J.B. and J.D. Minna, Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes by promoter methylation is important in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. Cancer Biol Ther, 2002. 1(3)
44.	Bert, T., et al., Expression spectrum and methylation-dependent regulation of melanoma antigen-encoding gene family members in pancreatic cancer cells. Pancreatology, 2002. 2(2)Human MAGE and GAGE genes encode tumor-specific antigens presented by HLA I molecules recognized on tumor cells by cytolytic T lymphocytes. To determine if pancreatic cancer patients would be suitable for MAGE- or GAGE-based immunotherapy, the expression frequency of MAGE-A1, -A2, -A3, -A4, -A6 and GAGE1-8 genes was assessed in 15 pancreatic tumor cell lines and 23 pancreatic tumor specimens using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In 67% of the cell lines at least one of the MAGE-A genes was detected, 53% revealed concomitant expression of two or more genes. GAGE1-8 expression was detected in 47% of the cell lines. In the primary pancreatic tumors, MAGE-A analysis revealed exclusive MAGE-A1 and MAGE-A2 gene expression in 26 and 30% of the specimens, respectively, independent from clinicopathologic factors. Treatment of MAGE-A expression-negative pancreatic tumor cells with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine could activate MAGE-A1, MAGE-A2, MAGE-A3, MAGE-A4 and GAGE transcription suggesting silencing due to promoter methylation. Interestingly, a metastatic lesion to the liver revealed concomittant expression of MAGE-A1, -A2, -A3 and -A6 consistent with a more pronounced genome-wide hypomethylation in metastases. Therefore, a subset of pancreatic cancer patients could be eligible for active, specific immunotherapy directed against MAGE-A antigens and demethylating agents could increase the number of candidate patients.
